Abstract 
This paper reviews the existing research on green finance. It identifies the important themes in 
the green finance literature, particularly, the strategies to increase green financing; efforts to 
make green investment profitable; promoting green financing using technology and policy, the 
role of regulators and financial institutions in the green finance agenda, and the challenges of 
green financing. Several cross-country observations about the challenges of green finance and 
solutions to green finance issues are documented. The findings show that green finance has the 
potential to make a significant difference in the environment, society and for climate change 
mitigation, but many challenges abound such as the lack of awareness about green finance, 
inconsistent definitions of green finance, lack of policy coordination for green financing, 
inconsistent policies, and lack of profitable incentives to investors and financial institutions who 
are willing to invest in climate change mitigation. 
Keywords: literature review, green finance, green investment, climate change, sustainable 
finance, green bonds, green banks, sustainable development goals, climate finance, 
environment, green loan, climate change mitigation. Paris Agreement, COP26.

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/359204126
 Green finance research around the world: a review of literature
 Article  in  International Journal of Green Economics · April 2022
 DOI: 10.1504/IJGE.2022.10048432
 CITATIONS
 58
 1 author:
 Peterson K. Ozili
 Academic
 389 PUBLICATIONS   11,168 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
 All content following this page was uploaded by Peterson K. Ozili on 11 June 2022.
 READS
 22,093
 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
Peterson K. Ozili 
Abstract 
This paper reviews the existing research on green finance. It identifies the important themes in 
the green finance literature, particularly, the strategies to increase green financing; efforts to 
make green investment profitable; promoting green financing using technology and policy, the 
role of regulators and financial institutions in the green finance agenda, and the challenges of 
green financing. Several cross-country observations about the challenges of green finance and 
solutions to green finance issues are documented. The findings show that green finance has the 
potential to make a significant difference in the environment, society and for climate change 
mitigation, but many challenges abound such as the lack of awareness about green finance, 
inconsistent definitions of green finance, lack of policy coordination for green financing, 
inconsistent policies, and lack of profitable incentives to investors and financial institutions who 
are willing to invest in climate change mitigation. 
Keywords: literature review, green finance, green investment, climate change, sustainable 
finance, green bonds, green banks, sustainable development goals, climate finance, 
environment, green loan, climate change mitigation. Paris Agreement, COP26. 
JEL Code: F64, F65, G21, Q01, Q56. 
Published in: International Journal of Green Economics 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
1. Introduction 
In this paper, I review the existing research on green finance. In the review, I identify the 
dominant research themes in the green finance literature, and suggest important areas for 
further research in green finance academic and policy discourse. Broadly defined, green finance 
is the acquisition and utilization of funds for activities that protect the environment and deliver 
a fair return to investors or lenders (Berensmann and Lindenberg, 2019; Ozili, 2021a). The 
objective of green finance is to increase the level of financial flows from financial institutions to 
economic agents involved in projects and activities that preserve the environment towards 
achieving the sustainable development goals (Lee and Baral, 2017; Force, 2015). 
The need to reduce harm to the environment, caused by fossil fuel emissions, has led to calls for 
divestment from fossil fuel activities, and a shift to investing in low-carbon projects and activities 
that protect the environment in a sustainable way (Bergman, 2018; Cleveland and Reibstein, 
2015). This call has both national and international dimensions. At the national level, many 
countries like Canada, Japan, Mexico and the United Kingdom have issued policy statements to 
increase citizens’ awareness about the negative effects of fossil fuel emissions on the climate, 
and the associated climate change risks. At the international level, countries have signed the Paris 
Agreement which is a legally binding international treaty on climate change mitigation (Dimitrov, 
2016; Blau, 2017). The purpose of the Paris Agreement is to limit global warning to below 2 or 
1.5 degree Celsius (Rogelj et al, 2016; Hoegh-Guldberg et al, 2018). The members of the United 
Nations Climate Change Conference of the Parties, popularly known as (COP26), have also made 
some commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. To achieve the Paris Agreement 
objective and the COP26 mandate, a lot of financial resources need to be mobilized (Tollefson, 
2018). These financial resources are commonly referred to as green finance or green financial 
instruments. The transition to ‘low carbon’ or ‘environment-friendly’ economic activities requires 
novel financing to cater for the needs of a small but growing green economy (Dikau and Volz, 
2021; Lamperti et al, 2019; Sachs et al, 2019a). Therefore, proponents of a green economy have 
proposed ‘green finance’ as a viable solution to meet the financing needs of individuals, 
corporations and governments involved in projects and activities that preserve the environment 
2 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
in a sustainable way (Mohd and Kaushal, 2018; Falcone and Sica, 2019; Soundarrajan and Vivek, 
2016). 
Green finance is a recent innovation that offers an alternative financing pathway to individuals, 
corporations and governments willing to fund and invest in green activities or low carbon 
activities (Huang et al, 2019). The benefits of green finance include: the distribution of funds to 
preserve the environment (Wang and Zhi, 2016), the flow of funds to sustainable trade and 
investment activities (Eyraud et al, 2013), low-risk financing (Taghizadeh-Hesary and Yoshino, 
2019), and the development of green investment and financing instruments (Sachs et al, 2019a). 
Despite these benefits of green finance, it is important to understand that green finance is only 
one aspect of sustainable finance for sustainable development. Apart from green finance, there 
are other sustainable finance options such as social finance, blue finance and digital finance, 
among others (Ozili, 2021a).  
In this paper, I focus on green finance. The level of interest in green finance has increased 
significantly in the industry. An example that illustrates the growing interest in green finance is 
the green finance schemes developed by many financial institutions and corporations such as: 
the green home loans by Bendigo Bank in Australia; the government-led ‘green’ mortgage 
initiatives by Dutch banks in Europe; solar energy financing by NRB bank in the United States; 
environmental home equity program by Bank of America in the United States; clean air auto loan 
products by VanCity in Canada; the issuance of climate credit card by Radobank in Europe, and 
the Landcare Term Deposit by Westpac in Australia.1 Meanwhile, interest in green finance among 
academics and researchers is relatively low, and the number of scientific articles focusing on 
green finance is still very low.  
Some studies have emerged recently in the green finance literature. These studies examine a 
number of issues such as: private participation in green finance (Taghizadeh-Hesary and Yoshino, 
2019); the role of green finance in achieving the United Nations sustainable development goals 
1https://www.unepfi.org/fileadmin/documents/greenprods_01.pdf 
3 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
(Meena, 2013; Dörry and Schulz, 2018; Sachs et al, 2019a); closing the green financing gap 
(Hafner et al, 2020); the role of central banks in green financing (Volz, 2017); the development 
of the green finance sector (Weber and ElAlfy, 2019); the definition problems of green finance 
(Lindenberg, 2014; Berrou et al, 2019), and the interrelationship between green finance and 
other alternative finance instruments such as digital finance and social finance (Ozili, 2021a).  
At this juncture, I will like to commend Zhang et al (2019) for their review of existing green finance 
research. They used a bibliometric analysis approach, and show that there is no generally agreed 
definition of green finance. They also suggest the need for more research on green finance in 
developing countries. To complement Zhang et al (2019), I bring together in this article the most 
recent developments in green finance research. The aim is to provide a comprehensive 
understanding of green finance to academics, policy makers and practitioners. To do this, I review 
the policy, practitioner and academic literatures on green finance to identify the most salient 
developments and issues in the green finance literature, and thereafter, suggest some directions 
for further research. 
This review article contributes to the literature in the following ways. One, the review contributes 
to the sustainable finance literature. Studies in this literature include Dörry and Schulz (2018), 
Schumacher et al (2020), Durrani et al (2020), Ozili (2022a), etc. In the paper, I show that green 
finance is one approach to fund activities geared towards achieving the sustainable development 
goals. Two, this paper contributes to the literature that examine how innovative finance 
contributes to development. Studies in this literature include O'Sullivan (2005), Fagiolo et al 
(2020), Egger and Keuschnigg (2015) and Zhu et al (2020). In the paper, I show that green finance 
is an innovative approach for environmental financing for sustainable development. Three, this 
paper contributes to the literature that suggest ideas towards achieving the United Nations 2030 
sustainable development goals (Bebbington and Unerman, 2018; Bernstein, 2017). The paper 
shows that green finance is mostly considered to be a sustainable financing tool to help achieve 
the United Nations sustainable development goals. Four, this review article provides a guide to 
both researchers and practitioners on the subject of green finance, highlighting the main issues, 
the challenges, real-observations, and some research areas that need further investigation. 
4 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
Finally, the remarks about the future directions for green finance research in this review article 
are limited to issues in the literature that I find to be particularly significant. My aim in this review 
is to elicit comments and stimulate debates that will advance green finance research in the 
literature. 
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents the methodology. Section 3 
discuss several green finance concepts. Section 4 discuss the existing green finance research 
around the world.  Section 5 suggests some directions for future research. Section 6 presents the 
conclusions. 
2. Methodology 
The articles used in the review are journal articles, industry practitioner papers and policy 
reports. The selection of articles was done manually. A systematic search was conducted on 
Google Scholar using article abstract search and a search on the body-of-articles. This approach 
was taken on the assumption that the article abstract and the content of an article would contain 
the dominant green finance keywords used in the article search. The keywords are “green 
finance”, “green bonds” and “green financing”. Thesis and dissertation articles were excluded 
from this review. A further search was conducted on Google search engine to extract useful 
practitioner white papers and policy reports. A 2010 cut-off year was applied to ensure that the 
review captures the recent research in the green finance literature. 
5 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
3. Conceptual literature 
This section presents some important concepts that have dominated the green finance literature 
in recent years such as: green finance definitions; the importance of green finance; green finance 
products and instruments; the promoters of green finance; strategies for promoting green 
financing and investments, among others. 
3.1. Definitions of green finance 
There are several definitions of green finance. Lindenberg (2014) defines green finance as the 
financing of public and private green investments. Ozili (2021a) defines green finance as the 
financing of projects that yield economic benefits while promoting a sustainable environment. 
Wang and Zhi (2016) define green finance as finance that integrates environmental protection 
with economic profits. Lindenberg (2014) shows that green finance encompasses all investments 
in environmental goods and services, and investment in activities that reduce damage to the 
environment and the climate. Also, in public policy, green finance involves the financing of public 
policies that encourage the implementation of environment protection projects or environment 
damage mitigation projects and initiatives (Lindenberg, 2014). Bahl (2012) defines green finance 
as the financing of environment-friendly activities, green technology, and projects that reduce 
pollution. 
3.2. Why green finance is important 
Green finance is important because of its perceived benefits. Green finance promotes the 
construction of smart cities in the long run (He et al, 2020). Green finance promotes inclusive 
economic growth (Wang and Wang, 2020). Investments in green projects can reduce short- and 
long-term carbon emission levels (Li et al, 2021). Green financing will benefit institutional 
shareholders interested in impact investing (Tang and Zhang, 2020; Barber et al, 2021). Green 
financing has diversification benefits to investors in corporate and treasury markets (Reboredo, 
2018). Increase in green financing can reduce funding for fossil fuel activities that pose a risk to 
the environment and the climate (Sachs et al, 2019a, Ozili, 2022a). 
6 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
3.3. Green finance products and instruments 
A ‘traditional’ financial product, service or instrument can be made ‘green’ if the product, serrvice 
or instrument is used to raise funds that will be spent on environmentally-friendly investments, 
projects or activities (Li et al, 2018). Examples include: a loan issued at low interest rates to plant 
trees in some communities, syndicated loans to finance cross-border green projects, green 
mortgage loans, solar energy financing, and clean air auto loan products. 
Green instruments are instruments used to raise funds for green projects. The literature 
documents some examples of green finance instruments such as: green bonds, structured green 
funds (Lindenberg, 2014; Sachs et al, 2019b; Chang et al, 2019); carbon market instruments, 
community-based green funds (Sachs et al, 2019b); green bond grant scheme (Chang et al, 2019); 
international climate fund (GFI, 2016); green venture capital and green venture fund (Randjelovic 
et al, 2003; Nassiry and Wheeler, 2011). 
3.4. Promoters of green finance 
The main agents promoting the growth and development of green finance are banks, institutional 
investors, research institutes, public agencies, central banks, financial regulators, international 
financial institutions, and universities (Berensmann and Lindenberg, 2016; Ozili, 2019). Oh and 
Kim (2018) and Ozili (2022b) show that private firms such as commercial banks and private equity 
funds play an important role in promoting green finance. For instance, the European Investment 
Bank (EIB) plays a key role in financing renewable energy projects and energy efficiency 
improvement projects in Europe while government agencies in European countries tend to focus 
on providing an enabling policy environment for green projects (Wang and Zhi, 2016). 
3.5. Strategies for increasing green financing and investments 
Berensmann and Lindenberg (2016) suggest some strategies for increasing the flow of private 
capital to green projects and activities. They include: designing an enabling business environment 
that facilitates green financing; developing standards and rules for disclosure that would promote 
the growth of green finance assets; providing financial and regulatory incentives to encourage 
green financing and investments, fostering greater transparency in the definition of green 
7 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
finance; and finally, existing financial, environmental and regulatory policies should be better 
coordinated. Tu et al (2020) show that the presence of an efficient legal framework for green 
bond operations is crucial for developing green bond markets while Oh and Kim (2018) suggest 
that the government need to collaborate with private firms to improve green financing. 
3.6. Making green investment a profitable venture through green financing 
Sachs et al (2019a) show that financial institutions show more interest in fossil fuel projects than 
green projects, mainly because there are unknown risks associated with green investment, and 
they offer a low rate of return compared to fossil fuel investment. Taghizadeh-Hesary and 
Yoshino (2019) offered two ideas on how to increase private participation in green 
investment. The first idea is the creation of green credit guarantee schemes. The second idea is 
to return a portion of the tax revenue, originally generated from the spillover effect of green 
energy supply, to investors. They suggest that these two approach can reduce the risk of green 
investment and increase the rate of return to green investors. 
3.7. Using technology to advance green finance and green investment 
Taghizadeh-Hesary and Yoshino (2019) suggest that the use of distributed ledger technologies 
(or blockchains) can increase transparency in green financing and investment. Ozili (2021a) show 
that digital finance innovations can facilitate the funding of green projects which implies that 
digital finance is an enabler of green finance. Also, Ozili (2022c) shows that a blockchain-based 
central bank digital currency can increase the volume of financial activities in various sectors of 
the green economy particularly the circular economy. 
Nassiry (2018) suggests three broad areas for the application of Fintech to green finance, namely, 
(i) blockchain applications for sustainable development; (ii) blockchain use-cases for renewable 
energy, decentralized electricity market, carbon credits and climate finance; and (iii) innovation 
in financial instruments, including green bonds. Zhang et al (2018) argue that a government 
should provide a friendly regulatory environment that allows blockchain and other innovative 
technologies to supplement existing institutional frameworks towards achieving a sustainable 
environment and development goals. 
8 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
3.8. The role of regulatory agencies and institutions 
Volz (2017) examined the role of central banks in greening the financial system. Volz (2017) 
showed that central banks can use several tools and policy instruments to green the financial 
system. Some suggested tools that can be used by central banks include: discount policy, reserve 
requirements, capital requirements, open market operations, foreign exchange intervention, 
macro prudential policies, risk guidance, central bank communication, international cooperation 
among central banks. Some suggested policy instruments include: capital controls, interest rate 
controls, and offering swap lines. Ozili (2021b) also explored some options that central banks can 
use to reduce climate risk towards promoting a green economy. The options include: (i) imposing 
a climate change capital surcharge; (ii) imposing a fixed-rate risk capital - based on Tier 2 capital; 
(iii) a reduction in lending to industries whose activities destroy the environment and climate; (iv) 
creating a climate bank; and (v) requiring financial institutions to relocate their important assets 
to areas less prone to climate change events. 
3.9. Challenges of green finance 
Berensmann and Lindenberg (2016) identified some microeconomic challenges to green finance. 
The challenges include: problems in internalizing environmental externalities, information 
asymmetry problems, inadequate analytical capacity, lack of clarity in the definition of “green” 
in green finance, maturity mismatch between short-term and long-term green investment, the 
relatively short-term time horizon of savers and investors, lack of effective coordination between 
financial and environmental policies, and the lack of clarity on the extent of government support 
for the transition to a green economy. Falcone and Sica (2019) document other challenges to 
green finance. They include (i) uncertainty about government policies; (ii) limited policy support 
for the commercialization of new technologies; (iii) scarce involvement of financial suppliers in 
the biomass sector; (iv) finance not being tailored to small-scale investment needs; (v) the short
term orientation of financial instruments; (vi) limited knowledge about financing options; and 
(vii) limited technical expertise within companies. 
Gilchrist et al (2021) also identified some challenges of green finance for corporations. The 
challenges include (i) difficulty in the analysis of green finance, (ii) lack of consistency in assessing 
9 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
corporate greenness, (iii) the ambiguous definition of corporate greenness, and (iv) the 
unavailability of green data. Ntsama et al (2021) showed that institutional, financial, and political 
barriers in low-income and middle-income countries are responsible for the undeveloped green 
markets while Schletz et al (2020) state that the inability of green investment vehicles to grow 
green investment is partly attributed to high transaction costs for green certification and 
monitoring. Guild (2020) showed that poor institutional design of the renewable energy sector 
creates misaligned incentive structure for players in the renewable energy sector. Schletz et al 
(2020) explored the potential of blockchain-based security tokens to address market failure in 
green finance. They identified some challenges such as: software risk, regulatory uncertainty, and 
immature investment infrastructure. 
4. Green finance research around the World 
This section reviews some developments, observations, arguments and research evidence on 
green financing in several regions of the World. 
4.1. Europe 
Most studies on green finance in Europe are policy reports. There are very few academic studies. 
A European commission report (2017) shows that the common green financing strategies 
adopted in Europe are (i) ‘green bonds’ that are issued following green bond principles, (ii) ‘green 
lending’ by banks involved in green loan origination, and (iii) ‘green equity investment’. 
In Austria, Breitenfellner et al (2020) analyse the green finance market in Austria. They predict 
that the annual investment in Austria’s green economy will grow to an estimated EUR 17 billion 
between 2021 and 2030. They argue that public funding alone will not be sufficient, and that 
private capital should be mobilized to fund sustainable (or green) projects. They further argue 
that green finance will be a major breakthrough in achieving this goal. They acknowledge some 
existing weaknesses in the Austria financial system. They state that the Austrian market for 
sustainable finance products is underdeveloped by international standards, it is dominated by 
10 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
mutual funds and driven by institutional investors and not by private investors. They also point 
out that customers’ awareness of sustainable finance products is still low in Austria. 
In Italy, Falcone and Sica (2019), in their survey of Italian biomass producers, observe that the 
availability of green finance options does not prevent biomass producers from facing institutional 
and financial difficulties in funding their investment projects. Some of the difficulties 
encountered by the biomass producers are: uncertainty about government policies, the minimal 
involvement of financial suppliers in the biomass sector, the short-term orientation of green 
financial instruments, and the limited knowledge of available financing options. 
In the United Kingdom, CBI (2019) shows that many businesses and financial institutions are 
embracing the opportunities that green finance brings. Other businesses and financial 
institutions have not embraced green finance due to lack of knowledge, lack of awareness about 
green finance, limited access to clear data and an inadequate policy. CBI (2019) recommends that 
the UK finance industry should be encouraged to move towards green financing.  CBI (2019) also 
recommends that existing financial legislations should be re-examined to identify where 
incentives can be built-in to encourage green finance.  
In the Netherlands, a report by New Pathways (2020) documents that green funds allow 
individuals to invest in funds specifically directed at qualifying green projects such as renewable 
energy, wildlife conservation, and organic farmland. At least 70% of the funds’ volume should be 
invested in qualifying green projects (New Pathways, 2020). Between 2000 and 2009, there were 
6,066 projects financed with over €7.3bn of funding from quarter of a million individual investors 
(New Pathways, 2020). 
In Russia, Damianova et al (2018) show that Russian authorities need to put the right conditions 
and incentives in place to encourage financial institutions and private investors to participate in 
green financing. They identified some challenges to the development of green finance in Russia. 
The challenges are: (i) the absence of a champion public sector agency to coordinate all relevant 
stakeholders towards green financing; (ii) lack of many pipeline of green projects due to modest 
carbon reduction targets, underdeveloped green procurement, weak enforcement of existing 
environmental regulations and sector-level targets; (iii) lack of a regulatory framework for green 
11 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
finance instruments; and (iv) lack of awareness about the risks and return opportunities 
associated with green finance. To address the challenges of green finance development in Russia, 
Damianova et al (2018) suggest some solutions which include: (i) revisiting climate change 
commitments and assessing the financing needs of the green sector (e.g. green buildings, clean 
transport, renewable energy, waste management, sustainable agriculture etc.); (ii) identifying a 
national green finance champion, and establishing a coordination body represented by the key 
stakeholders; (iii) developing a green finance roadmap and corresponding action plan; (iv) 
exploring the potential impact of climate change and the low-carbon transition on 
macroeconomic and financial stability; (v) incorporating a green agenda in public policy 
institutions’ mandates and public procurement; and (vi) raising awareness about green finance 
and building capacity at all levels. 
In Ukraine, Sokolova et al (2019) show that the Ukrainian government has not shown significant 
interest in the green economy. For this reason, non-governmental organizations in Ukraine have 
a more direct influence in the process of building a green economy than the government itself. 
Meanwhile, the creation of the Ukrainian Green Bank “Ukrgasbank” has increased the prospects 
of green financing in Ukraine even though the creation of the green bank was not a government
led initiative. 
In the European Union, Chuah (2020) critically analyse an EU green shipping finance facility, and 
argue that a finance facility, however green, will always have contractual constrictions, policy 
constraints and finance prudential limits, which calls into question the usefulness of “green 
finance.” 
4.2. Asia 
In Asia, there are notable developments in green finance. Tolliver et al (2021) show that the 
amount of green finance in Asia has increased to meet the growing demand for sustainable 
economic development in the region. Countries like Japan, China, and South Korea have 
witnessed significant increase in green bond issuance. China has been a global leader in green 
bond issuance since 2015 while green bond issuance by large financial corporations and 
development banks in Japan and South Korea continue to grow. Meanwhile, Escalante et al 
12 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
(2020) found a lack of diversity in green bond market participation in China. In Hong Kong, HKGFA 
(2020) documents some of the green finance development in some parts of Asia. HKGFA (2020) 
reports that there is a cross-agency steering group established to accelerate the growth of green 
and sustainable finance, and support the government’s climate strategies. There is also a self
assessment framework to enable the measurement of “greenness baseline” of individual 
authorized institutions. There is also a comprehensive database platform dedicated to providing 
investors with information about sustainable (and green) investment options in Hong Kong’s 
securities market. Meanwhile, in mainland China, HKGFA (2020) reports the existence of 
Shanghai-Singapore financial co-operation, and virtual events on China green bond market. 
Volz (2018) acknowledges that green investment is difficult in Asia for many reasons. They 
include: the difficult investment conditions; adverse regulatory and legal environment; 
inconsistent policies; cumbersome permission procedures; lack of awareness of environmental 
and climate risks; lack of training for staff responsible for assessing environmental and climate 
risk in the finance industry; shortage of staff with experience in green lending; shortage of 
bankable and investable projects; lack of mandatory environmental risk analysis; and lack of 
environmental, social and governance (ESG) disclosure requirements. Volz (2018) suggests some 
solutions to enhance green finance in Asia. They include: raising awareness about environmental 
and climate risks in the financial sector; developing capacity in the finance industry for 
environmental risk analysis and management through knowledge-building and knowledge 
sharing; building up capacity in the finance industry needed to develop green lending 
instruments; enhancing transparency through ESG disclosure requirements; providing incentives 
for the financing of green projects; supporting the development of new market segments such 
as the green bond market or climate risk insurance; developing long-term local currency 
refinancing sources for banks to enable them to extend long-term credit. 
In India, Jena and Dhruba (2020) show that there is a growing need to sensitize India’s financial 
sector on the importance and benefits of green finance. They also suggest that a sustained, 
market-led collaborative action is needed to accelerate green capital flows in India, beginning 
with an agreed formal definition of green finance. Other efforts include: formulating policies to 
incentivize green finance, and introduce penalties for carbon-intensive investment. 
13 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
In Singapore, Chang (2019) identifies some challenges and solutions for promoting green 
financing in Singapore. Some identified challenges include the following: (i) small and medium
sized enterprises (SMEs) in Singapore do not have access to the process of issuing green bonds 
because they are small and are not capable of taking on projects that can be financed by green 
bonds; (ii) lack of awareness of green finance by SMEs; (iii) the domestic market for green bonds 
is small in Singapore; (iv) transparency and reporting are two main risks in the green bond market. 
Chang (2019) suggests the following solutions which include (i) establishing clarity for what 
constitutes “green,”; (ii) releasing more information on bond issuers’ ESG performance; (iii) 
enhancing the transparency of the quality of financial instruments for green investments, (iv) 
creating demand for green investments by establishing green pockets; (v), build and share 
knowledge and capacity; (vi) jump-start green finance markets and investment, and (vii) define 
the value of green.  
4.3. Africa 
There are very few studies on green finance in Africa. In policy circles, South Africa is the only 
African country that has a formal national strategy for green finance. In December 2017, Nigeria 
became the first country in Africa, and only the fourth in the world, to issue a sovereign green 
bond. The ‘green climate fund’ was the biggest cumulative multilateral climate fund active in Sub 
Saharan Africa in 2019, followed by the Least Developed Countries Fund and the World Bank 
administered Clean Technology Fund (Watson and Schalatek, 2019).  
In the African region, Morocco and Nigeria have developed national plans for sustainable green 
financing. In South Africa, the Johannesburg Stock Exchange created a dedicated green segment 
in the stock exchange. Kenya has launched green bonds guidelines in a joint collaboration 
between the capital market authority and the Nairobi Securities Exchange. Seychelles and 
Namibia have announced the issuance of blue and green bonds, respectively. Mauritius and 
Gabon have developed national roadmaps to launch green bonds. Central Africa has started to 
develop its green capital market. 
Zadek and Flynn (2013) show that south-originating green finance (SGF) flows are growing in 
South Africa. This is because South Africa has sophisticated financial markets which offer 
14 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
opportunities for financial institutions to invest in longer-term green investments. In 2012, 
Nedbank created South Africa’s first Green Bond. The bond was issued by the Industrial 
Development Corporation of South Africa. The green bond is a fixed-term investment available 
to all individuals and earns interest at a fixed rate of up to 7.5% for the duration of the 
investment. All funds invested in the green bond are set aside for renewable energy projects that 
contribute towards growing South Africa’s green economy. 
UNEP (2015) suggests some policy options that can help to mobilize capital towards a green 
economy in the African continent. They include: the provision of green and inclusive credit 
guidelines and incentives, the issuance in green bonds, and the inclusion of green securities and 
green stocks in African stock exchange. Dia (2019) suggests that African countries have begun to 
experiment with innovative finance such as crowd-funding for clean energy in Uganda and green 
bond financing in Nigeria. Marbuah (2020) explores the green bonds market in Africa, and show 
evidence of modest growth of the green bonds market in Africa. The market is dominated by a 
small number of states with a cumulative issuance of less than 1 per cent of global volumes, 
meanwhile, multilateral development institutions have the largest green bonds issue in Africa. 
LSEG (2020) recommends that African countries will need to look at scaling down their exposure 
to the fossil fuel industry, and African governments will need to make public policy shifts in favour 
of a greener and more climate-resilient economy. Government involvement will be vital in 
developing the African green finance markets through the creation of policies that make holding 
green assets more attractive. 
Overall, the success factors that are crucial for developing the green finance market in Africa are: 
effective interaction between public officials and private actors, international collaboration and 
capacity building, active underlying securities markets, improved disclosure and capital market 
incentives; and the provision of strong guidance on what is ‘green’ and the agreed definition has 
to be consistent with international guidelines. 
15 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
4.4. North and South America 
CBI (2017) shows that the rise of the green bond market in Brazil and Mexico has helped to boost 
cross-regional trade. UNEP (2019) documents that Argentina issued three green bond deals 
between 2017 and 2018: two green bonds from sub national institutions and one green bonds 
from a financial institution. ECLAC (2017) documents the developments in the green bond market 
in Latin America and the Caribbean. The ECLAC (2017) report shows that the region issued US$ 
8.4 billion in bonds in local and international markets between 2014 and 2017 (as of August 31, 
2017). The bulk of the region’s green-focused bonds of US$7.1 billion were issued in international 
markets. On average, green bonds represented only 1.6% of the total Latin American and 
Caribbean bond issuance in international markets in the period. In the first half of 2017, green 
bonds accounted for 3.7% of the region’s total international debt issuance (ECLAC, 2017).  
Similarly, Ketterer et al (2019) show that there is need to ensure that local ‘green’ definitions and 
standards are aligned with internationally accepted guidelines to avoid confusion and 
reputational risk in the Latin and Caribbean region. They suggest that more information should 
be provided to improve international investors’ understanding of general bond market 
performance and green bond performance in the Latin American and Caribbean region. 
In Mexico, Lovells (2019) documents that the first Mexican green bond was issued in 2015 to 
fund wind energy generation projects in Mexico. The government of Mexico City in 2016 became 
the first local government in Latin America to launch a local green bond to finance climate
resilient infrastructure. The second local green bond was issued in 2017 for US$80million for the 
construction of the Metrobus Line 7’s road corridor, which financed the construction of 
terminals. The third local green bond in Mexico City was issued in 2018 for US$57million for 27 
projects related to energy efficiency projects, the maintenance of the Metrobus, and 
improvement in drinking water and sewage infrastructure in certain communities in Mexico City. 
In Canada, ECCC (2018) shows that an expert panel on sustainable finance recommended that (i) 
the Canadian government should embed climate-related risk into the monitoring, regulation and 
supervision of Canada’s financial system; (ii) expand Canada’s green fixed income market; and 
(iii) set a global standard for transition-oriented financing.  
16 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
4.5. Oceania 
There are very few studies on green finance for countries in the Oceania continent. 
In New Zealand, NZGIF (2019) shows that the government established a green investment bank 
in New Zealand. The bank is called the ‘New Zealand Green Investment Finance’. The purpose of 
the bank is to accelerate investment that reduce greenhouse gas emissions in New Zealand. 
Meanwhile, the OECD defines a green investment bank as a public, quasi-public or non-profit 
entity established specifically to facilitate private investment into domestic low-carbon, climate
resilient infrastructure. NZGIF (2019) shows that the aim of the New Zealand Green Investment 
Fund is to use private finance to rapidly scale up emissions reduction, and investment in clean 
and innovative technologies and companies. RIAA (2019) shows that green financing prospects 
are already underway in New Zealand due to the establishment of a green investment fund, and 
the creation of green bonds. 
In Australia, Geddes et al (2018) identify the significant financing gap affecting the large-scale 
deployment of low-carbon technologies. They suggest that State investment banks can play a key 
role in closing the finance gap by encouraging private investment into low-carbon investments. 
They suggest that State investment banks can enable financial sector learning, create trust for 
green projects, and take a first-mover or early-mover role in offering green financing options. 
Subsequently, Geddes et al (2020) analyse the parliamentary debate about the establishment 
and design of Australia's Clean Energy Finance Corporation, which is equivalent to the UK’s green 
investment bank. They find that the political controversy in Australia was partisan on all debate 
topics. Debates on higher-level establishment concepts especially the role of the State in the 
establishment received more attention in Australia. 
17 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
4.6. Green finance developments in the G20 countries 
Table 1 below shows the trend in green finance developments among the G20 countries from 
2016 to 2017. China, United Kingdom and Mexico have the largest achievements in green 
financing, followed by Turkey, South Africa, Brazil, France and India. The green finance 
developments are broadly categorized into: (i) support for the development of local green bond 
markets; (ii) promoting international collaboration for cross-border investment in green bonds, 
and (iii) improving the measurement of green finance activities and their impacts.  
Table 1: Green finance developments in the G20 countries 
G20 Member 
Countries 
Support for the 
development 
of local green bond 
markets 
Promoting international 
collaboration for cross
border investment in green 
bonds 
Argentina 
Improving the 
measurement 
of green finance activities 
and their impact 
Australia 
* 
*   
*   
Brazil 
Canada 
*  
* 
*  
China 
* 
* 
France 
* 
*  
* 
Germany 
India 
*   
* 
Indonesia 
*  
Italy 
*   
*   
Japan 
Mexico 
*   
* 
Russia 
* 
*   
* 
Saudi Arabia    
South Africa 
* 
*  
South Korea 
Turkey 
*   
*  
UK 
* 
* 
* 
US 
* 
EU 
*   
(N/A) 
International 
*  
*  
Source: UNEP (2017) United Nations Environment Progress (2017) report, p.14 
* 
18 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
4.7. Differences in green finance terminology across continents 
The terminology used to describe green finance may vary across different countries and 
continents because of the different ways in which policy makers and practitioners interpret green 
finance both in a national context or cross-border context. In the end, country-specific green 
finance terminologies will converge into a common continental terminology that allows for 
continental comparison of green finance terminologies. Table 2 below shows some of the 
common green finance terminologies used in some continents. 
Continent 
Table 2: Specific terminologies for green finance in continents 
Common terminologies for green finance 
North America Green financial assets; green investment; sustainable finance; green funds; green 
bonds. 
South America Green bank; green bonds; green sovereign bonds. 
Africa 
Oceania 
Green Sukuk; climate finance; green bonds; green climate fund. 
Sustainable finance; green loans; green bonds 
Asia 
Europe 
Sustainable finance; green loans, green bonds, green investment 
Green bond; sustainable finance; climate finance; green investment; climate 
awareness bond. 
5. Some gaps and areas for further research 
In this section, some directions for further research are suggested. 
5.1. More research on green innovations and risk-return tradeoff 
Green innovations will be essential in addressing the complex environmental and sustainability 
challenges of green financing. There is a need to examine how green innovation can contribute 
to expanding green financing and investment options. Green entrepreneurs can also play an 
important role in identifying green opportunities for profitable investments. Future studies 
should examine how green innovation and entrepreneurs can contribute towards expanding 
green investment and funding options. Also, future studies can empirically examine the link 
between green finance and green innovation. Innovation in green financing and investment 
19 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
comes with risks, and the higher the risk, the higher the return. Currently, there is a scant 
literature on the tradeoff between risk and expected return in green financing and investment. 
Future studies should also assess, in greater depth, the tradeoff between green risk and expected 
green return. 
5.2. Causality between green investment and environmental change 
There is need for more research studies that explore the causality between green investment 
and environmental change. There are many questions to be asked in this area: for instance, does 
environmental change create the need for green investment? Or, does green investment lead to 
environmental change? Can a one-time investment in green project lead to a significant change 
in environmental outcomes? Is there a direct or indirect causation between green investment 
and environmental outcome? Can institutional weakness affect the potential for green 
investment to make a positive change in environmental outcomes? Can government support, or 
the lack of it, affect the causality between green investment and environmental outcomes? What 
is the best approach to estimate the causality between green investment and environmental 
change? Future research can shed some light on these issues.  
5.3. Identifying the boundaries of private and public sector involvement  
Future studies should identify the boundaries of private sector and public sector participation in 
green financing. Presently, there is little research in the literature about the limits of private 
sector participation and public sector participation in green financing. There is a need to identify 
the limit of private sector participation and the limit of public sector participation in green 
financing. Excessive citizen involvement in green financing may lead to environment policies 
being dominated by divergent private interests. Similarly, involvement by many companies may 
lead to agency conflicts as companies will have to choose the extent to which they want to pursue 
green interests while pursuing their core profitability objectives. Public sector agents will also 
have to determine how much fiscal resources will be committed to the green economy. In sum, 
there has to be a defined limit for private and public sector involvement since the private sector 
20 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
and the public sector are not perfect substitutes or complements. Future studies should suggest 
ideas on how to set the boundaries of private and public sector involvement in green financing. 
5.4. Synergy between green finance, social finance and digital finance 
Research on green finance, social finance and digital finance is growing rapidly. Nonetheless, the 
three concepts ‘green finance’, ‘digital finance’ and ‘social finance’ should not be seen as 
separate concepts. Ozili (2021a) presents a conceptual relationship between green finance, 
digital finance, and social finance. Future studies should explore, in greater depth, the link or 
interrelationship between green, digital and social finance. Furthermore, future studies can 
identify other synergistic benefits of combining green, digital and social finance for a sustainable 
environment and society. There are potential synergistic benefits to be gained from using them 
as complements for achieving the sustainable development goals. 
5.5. Effect of regulation on green businesses, innovation and activities 
Regulation often impose extra burden on pro-green companies and financial institutions through 
high cost of compliance with green regulations. Green corporations and entrepreneurs may 
receive rewards for complying with green regulations and may receive penalties for non
compliance with green regulations. Excess green regulation can discourage green innovation and 
ultimately reduce the size of pro-green activities. Therefore, there is a need to explore the 
optimal level of regulation needed to support green businesses and encourage green innovation. 
Future studies should find the right balance between imposing green regulation and encouraging 
green innovation, while at the same time, promoting effective regulation. 
5.6. More research on green finance opportunity in developing countries  
Future studies can explore the green finance opportunity in developing countries. Future studies 
can also explore how the challenging policy and institutional environments affect the 
development of green finance and investment markets in developing countries. Such studies 
should take into account the unique institutional and policy barriers that exist in developing 
countries. 
21 
Peterson K. Ozili                                            
Green finance research around the world: a review of literature 
5.7. More research about the usefulness of mainstream tools of financial analysis in assessing 
the viability of green projects and investment opportunities 
Future studies can assess the usefulness of mainstream tools of financial analysis in assessing 
whether proposed green projects are viable in terms of profitability and sustainability. There are 
two schools of thought on this. One perspective argues that a new set of tools should be 
developed and used to assess green financing and green investment opportunities. The second 
perspective argues that existing mainstream tools of financial analysis can be used to evaluate 
green financing and investment opportunities. The latter perspective seems more plausible even 
though there is yet no evidence to show that adapting existing mainstream financial analysis tools 
will be more effective in assessing green financing investment and opportunities. 
6. Conclusion 
This paper presented a literature review of green finance research and identified some fruitful 
areas for future research. The findings show that green finance has the potential to make a 
significant difference in the environment and society but many challenges abound such as the 
lack of awareness, inconsistent definitions, lack of policy coordination, inconsistent policies, and 
lack of incentives to investors and financial institutions, among others. Some suggested areas for 
further research include: the need for more research on green innovation and risk-return 
tradeoff; two, the need to explore the causality between green investment and environmental 
change; three, the need to identify the boundaries of private and public sector involvement in 
green financing; four, the need to examine the synergy between green finance, social finance 
and digital finance; five, the need to investigate the effect of regulation on green businesses and 
activities; six, the need to explore the green finance opportunity in developing countries, and 
finally, more research is needed to explore the usefulness of mainstream tools of financial 
analysis in assessing the viability of green projects and investment opportunities. This study has 
one limitation.

BACKGROUND PAPER
 Sustainable Finance: 
A Primer and Recent 
Developments
 Alex Nicholls
 DISCLAIMER
 This background paper was prepared for the report Asian Development Outlook 2021: Financing a Green and 
Inclusive Recovery. It is made available here to communicate the results of the underlying research work with 
the least possible delay. The manuscript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the 
procedures appropriate to formally-edited texts.
 The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
Asian Development Bank (ADB), its Board of Governors, or the governments they represent. ADB does not 
guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this document and accepts no responsibility for any consequence 
of their use. The mention of specific companies or products of manufacturers does not imply that they are 
endorsed or recommended by ADB in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.
 Any designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area, or use of the term “country” in 
this document, is not intended to make any judgments as to the legal or other status of any territory or area. 
Boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this document do not imply any 
judgment on the part of the ADB concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance 
of such boundaries.
Sustainable Finance: A Primer and Recent Developments 
Professor Alex Nicholls, MBA 
I. INTRODUCTION TO SUSTAINABLE FINANCE 
A. 
Historical Context 
The development of innovative finance tools and instruments to address social and environmental 
problems is nothing new. Historically, such finance has focused on concessionary finance, 
including grants, and mutual finance to support the “social economy” or “social and solidarity 
economy”. In many countries, the social economy has long played an important role in the 
provision of nonmarket goods and services outside of government or mainstream markets. For 
example, the cooperative and mutual sector represents an important element of many economies 
globally, employing more than 1.2 billion people (one in six of all employees) in more than three 
million organizations. In 2019, the largest 300 cooperatives had a turnover of more than $2 
trillion,1 of which 41 were in Asia.2 The key sectors in which cooperatives and mutual 
organizations operate are work integration, agriculture, microfinance, and consumer groups. Most 
cooperatives and mutual organizations are small, but a number operate at significant scale. For 
example, Amul Dairy is the largest dairy producer in India.3 Moreover, the larger social economy 
in the European Union (EU)4 represents an important element of the overall economy, both in 
terms of its economic impact (13.6 million jobs, 8% of gross domestic product across the EU),5 
but also its wider social impact in terms of innovations designed to address intractable social, 
community, and environmental issues.6 In the post–COVID-19 world, the social economy also 
offers an alternative economic model that connects actors from government, not-for-profit, and 
for-profit organizations; and may provide important insights into how to increase the resilience 
and heterogeneity of business ecosystems more generally and to reduce the risk of exogenous 
shocks to the economy as a whole.  
1 https://bccm.coop/what-is-a-co-operative/co-operatives-and-mutuals-around-the-world/. 
2 https://monitor.coop/sites/default/files/publication-files/wcm2019-final-1671449250.pdf. 
3 http://www.amuldairy.com. 
4 The social economy in the EU consists of 2.8 million social enterprises, mutual and cooperative associations and foundations. 
https://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/20182/313344/SEE-Action+Plan+for+Social+Economy.pdf. 
5 https://s3platform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/20182/313344/SEE-Action+Plan+for+Social+Economy.pdf. 
6 DG CLIMA Climate and DG ENVIR Environment; DG EAC Education, Youth, Sport and Culture; DG SANTI Health and Food Safety; DG 
ENER Energy; DG FISMA Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union, and DG ECFIN Economics and Financial 
Affairs; DG CONNECT Communications Content, Networks, and Technology; and DG RTD Research and Innovation. 
1 
B. 
Terminology 
Despite the long history - and continued growth -of the social economy globally, it is only 
relatively recently that a market of finance specifically aimed at creating social and environmental 
impact, as well as a financial return, has emerged. However, today, this market remains somewhat 
confused and under-institutionalized - lacking a consistent terminology, consolidated financial or 
impact performance data sets despite a plethora of competing reporting standards and principles 
(for example, the UN Principles for Responsible Investment [PRI],7 the Global Reporting Initiative 
[GRI],8 and the Social Accounting Standards Board [SASB].9
 ))
 ) and limited regulation around 
disclosure (though see recent EU and UK regulatory models).10 Variously, the finance that is 
deployed for social and environmental impacts has been categorized as grants (philanthropic 
finance);11 venture philanthropy (long-term start-up grants plus other pro bono support);12 mission 
and program-related finance (charitable asset finance);13 development finance (from transnational 
development finance institutions [DFIs]);14 ethical finance (that is based upon moral judgements 
of performance, often linked to faith systems);15 social (impact) finance (that supports the social 
economy more widely, particularly in Europe);16 green finance (that is focused on the climate 
crisis and associated issues of pollution);17 and impact finance (that is focused specifically on 
measurable impact). Table 1 summarizes these types of finance with example organizations. 
7 https://www.unpri.org/pri/what-are-the-principles-for-responsible-investment. 
8 https://www.globalreporting.org. 
9 https://www.sasb.org. 
10 https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/company-reporting-and-auditing/company-reporting/corporate-sustainability-reporting_en; 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-to-enshrine-mandatory-climate-disclosures-for-largest-companies-in-law 
11 https://www.philanthropy-impact.org. 
12 https://www.ubs.com/global/en/ubs-society/philanthropy/ubs-optimus
foundation.html?ef_id=Cj0KCQjwufn8BRCwARIsAKzP696fi6DAC5FUYCvMBO0NEQtdNFanJ0fwAgCLk1HEYaj8NCgkDOZJevEaAgB
 AEALw_wcB:G:s&s_kwcid=AL!410!3!476250982510!b!!g!!%2Bphilanthropy. 
13 https://web.cof.org/2013fall/docs/resources/Impact-Investing-Basics.pdf. 
14 https://www.adb.org. 
15 https://www.globalethicalfinance.org. 
16 https://www.goodfinance.org.uk/investors-advisors/social-finance; and 
https://www.reedsmith.com/en/capabilities/services/finance/social-impact-finance. 
17 https://www.greenfinanceinstitute.co.uk and https://greenfinanceplatform.org. 
2 
Table 1: Terminologies for Sustainable Finance 
Type of Finance 
Example Organization 
Grants 
Venture Philanthropy 
Rockefeller Foundation 
New Philanthropy Capital 
Program-related investment 
Mission-related investment 
Ford Foundation 
KL Felicitas Foundation 
Development finance 
Ethical finance 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Faith Invest 
Social (impact) finance 
Green finance 
RBC Wealth Management 
Resonance Fund 
Impact finance 
Socially responsible finance 
Bridges Fund Management 
Nutmeg 
Source: Author’s own research. 
Despite this variety of definitions, some consistency of terminology has coalesced around the 
construct of “sustainable finance” in terms of a range of environmental, social, and governance 
(ESG) variables that are material in terms of investor decision-making around asset allocation 
strategies: 
Sustainable finance generally refers to the process of taking due account 
of environmental, social, and governance (ESG) considerations when making 
investment decisions in the financial sector, leading to increased longer-term 
investments into sustainable economic activities and projects.18 
The market for sustainable finance can be divided into two subcategories: negative sustainable 
finance that is characterized by investments screened according to their material risk profile on the 
three ESG dimensions (“do no harm”);19 and positive sustainable finance that is characterized by 
investments identified according to their potential for significant, additional, social, or 
environmental impact20 often aligned with the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs).21 For example, whereas the former would screen out tobacco companies or high 
18 https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/sustainable-finance/overview-sustainable-finance_en. 
19 This is categorized as an exclusion strategy. https://www.credit-suisse.com/media/assets/asset-management/docs/ch/investment-themes/cs
impact-1-esg-to-the-sdgs-2020-spread.pdf. 
20 This is categorized as an integration strategy. https://www.credit-suisse.com/media/assets/asset-management/docs/ch/investment-themes/cs
impact-1-esg-to-the-sdgs-2020-spread.pdf and https://www.credit-suisse.com/media/assets/microsite/docs/responsibleinvesting/the-double
delta-of-impact-investing.pdf. 
21 https://sdgs.un.org/goals. 
3 
carbon intensity companies from a portfolio, the latter would invest directly into health care 
innovations to address lung disease or green technology to replace petro-chemicals.22  
C. 
Investor Preferences 
A key driver behind the emergence of sustainable finance has been changing investor 
preferences, notably from the millennials who will benefit from the largest transfer of inherited 
wealth in human history over the two decades,23 accounting for $68 trillion.  Of these 
millennials, 45% stated that they wished to invest their funds to help others and considered social 
responsibility a key factor in making investment decisions.24 Moreover, 90% of women investors 
also believe making a positive impact on society is important. In addition, institutional investors, 
such as pension funds and insurance firms, are recalibrating their long-term investment risk 
models to include social governance and, particularly, environmental factors as material for their 
investment portfolios.25  
II. SUSTAINABLE FINANCE INVESTMENT STRATEGIES 
Sustainable finance investment strategies are either negative/exclusionary or positive/integrated. 
A. Negative (Exclusionary) Sustainable Finance 
This category is typically risk screened against a range of non-financial performance 
metrics across ESG categories, that leads to a recalibration of the long-term risk profiles of, for 
example, high-carbon intensity companies. Strategically, such screening results in divestment 
from, or the avoidance of, ESG high risk investments. The most common risk screen is high 
carbon intensity, but other risks include failures in: 
• Internal organizational structures, practices, and processes, such as effective internal 
accountability and transparent governance; strong worker relations; fair pay and safe 
working conditions; clear strategies to improve the inclusivity and diversity of the 
22 https://www.rbcwealthmanagement.com/gb/en/research-insights/the-growth-of-impact-investing-building-wealth-with-positive
outcomes/detail/?gclid=Cj0KCQjw5eX7BRDQARIsAMhYLP8jHs3GyRFi-Cy6Lq6cNqVCbEjALIDvJ745GkaWjl
U7T0979Kdjz0aAj43EALw_wcB. 
23 According to Forbes, Millennials will inherit over $68 trillion from their Baby Boomer parents by the year 2030. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jackkelly/2019/10/26/millennials-will-become-richest-generation-in-american-history-as-baby-boomers-transfer
over-their-wealth/#3dcc954b6c4b. 
24 https://privatebank.jpmorgan.com/gl/en/services/investing/sustainable-investing/impact-investing. 
25 https://www.institutionalassetmanager.co.uk/2020/05/19/285756/esg-will-be-industry-standard-within-five-years-say-institutional-investors. 
4 
workforce; committed investment in human capital and local communities; using 
recycling models to maximize the effective use of resources 
• External organizational effects and outcomes, such as respect for human rights and 
strategies to tackle inequality; and minimizing pollution 
An extension of passive screening that developed more recently is the more active use of voting 
rights to challenge corporate behaviour.26  
B. Positive (Integrated) Sustainable Finance 
This category typically aims to achieve a ‘Double Delta’27 of impact by providing both 
new, additional, capital and by focussing on high potential start-ups or high growth potential 
impact companies. Positive sustainable finance is often aligned with making an additional 
contribution towards one or more of the 17 UN SDGs (Figure 1). This is sometimes called 
Socially Responsible Investment.
 28 F
 28 To date, the main categories for SDG investing have 
been SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth), 12 (responsible consumption and 
production), and 13 (climate action) with the least prioritized SDGs including 1 (no poverty), 
2 (zero hunger), and 10 (reduced inequalities).
 2 9F
 29 Growing this market is of central 
importance to the achievement of the SDG targets by 2030, since there is currently an 
estimated annual shortfall of $3 trillion–$4 trillion in available finance.
 30 Positive sustainable 
finance investment strategies focus on providing new capital into high impact companies. 
3 0F
 26 https://www.aberdeenstandard.com/en/uk/adviser/responsible
investing?gclid=Cj0KCQjwlvT8BRDeARIsAACRFiViyk2kUXQvp8PJWbmjhM53W_3bf20y88JkY2RMUbz8R7pTGU8idoAaAsdjEALw_
 wcB. 
27 https://www.credit-suisse.com/media/assets/microsite/docs/responsibleinvesting/the-double-delta-of-impact-investing.pdf 
28 https://hbr.org/2019/01/the-state-of-socially-responsible-investing. 
29 https://pwc.blogs.com/sustainability/2018/01/sdg-prioritisation-is-business-on-the-right-track.html. 
30 https://www.sustainablegoals.org.uk/filling-the-finance-gap/. 
5 
Figure 1: United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 
Source: United Nations. https://sdgs.un.org/goals. 
III. SUSTAINABLE FINANCE CATEGORIES 
A. Environmental (Green) Finance  
In terms of ESG categories, environmental finance is more commonly described as ‘green 
finance’. Green finance provides start-up or growth capital into innovative enterprises that address 
climate related issues (positive/integrated) or divests from companies that perpetuate the climate 
crisis (negative/exclusionary). 
Negative - exclusionary - green finance typically focuses on moving investments from high carbon 
intensity to low carbon intensity companies (as divestment) or allocating capital to companies that 
are aiming to reduce their overall carbon footprint. A particular issue here is the long-term risk 
profile associated with investments in petrochemicals companies has been categorised as reflecting 
the mispriced balance sheet value of so-called ‘stranded assets.’ These are future extractions of 
existing oil and gas deposits that will not be able to be used without precipitating a total climate 
collapse. Carbontracker has estimated that this will result in the price of oil dropping below the 
6 
marginal price of production by 2050, making it unviable and significantly downgrading the value 
of petrochemical stocks today.31 
Positive – integrated- green finance typically invests in companies that provide green technology, 
such as solar or carbon capture technologies to address the climate crisis. Green investments also 
focus on companies working on environmentally sustainable management of natural resources, 
biodiversity conservation, renewable energy, energy efficiency, the circular economy, clean 
transportation, and pollution prevention and control.32 The positive green finance market is 
dominated by debt products, notably green bonds.33  Broadly speaking there are six forms of green 
bond:34 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Corporate bonds issued by a corporate entity to finance asset acquisitions 
Project bonds backed by single or multiple projects for which the investor has direct 
exposure to the risk of the project 
Asset-backed securities collateralized by one or more specific projects, usually 
providing recourse only to the assets 
Supranational, sovereign, sub-sovereign, or agency bonds issued by international 
financial institutions such as the World Bank or the European Investment Bank 
(EIB) 
Municipal bonds issued by a municipal government, region, or city, which also 
includes sovereign bonds 
Finance sector bonds issued by a financial institution to raise capital to finance on
balance-sheet lending (such as loans) to green activities 
Some carbon-intensive or high-polluting companies have raised green “transition” bonds to fund 
decarbonizing projects. For example, in 2020, Cadent Gas, a British firm, raised a €500 million 
green bond to fund works on reducing the leakages from its pipelines. In 2019, Enel, an Italian 
electricity firm, issued a green bond index that is linked to increasing the share of renewables in 
its generation capacity.35 Related to this form of green finance has been the move towards 
divestment from carbon-intensive companies.36
 31 https://carbontracker.org/can-you-see-stranded-assets-through-the-smog/ 
32 https://www.icmagroup.org/assets/documents/Regulatory/Green-Bonds/June-2019/Mapping-SDGs-to-Green-Social-and-Sustainability
Bonds06-2019-100619.pdf. 
33 Though equity issues in green technology companies are also used. https://www.nasdaq.com/solutions/green-equity-indexes. 
34 https://www.oecd.org/environment/cc/Green%20bonds%20PP%20%5Bf3%5D%20%5Blr%5D.pdf. 
35 https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2020/09/19/what-is-the-point-of-green-bonds. 
36 https://carbontracker.org. 
7 
Green bonds provide new flows of debt capital to support start-ups or high-growth green energy 
technologies, water management models, meat analogues, or carbon capture.37 More recently, 
there has been a growing interest in blue bonds and blended finance models that are focused on 
the “ocean economy” and issues of biodiversity and marine sustainability.38 Overall ‘sustainable’ 
debt issuance (including green bonds) reached $732 billion in 2020 – a 23% increase compared 
to the year before (see Figure 2).39  
Figure 2: Sustainable Debt Issuance 2013-2020 
.  
Source: Sustainalytics (2021) 
B. Social (Impact Investment) Finance 
Second, social finance provides start-up or growth capital into innovative enterprises that address 
a social market failure in the provision of welfare in sectors such as health, education, and 
employment (positive/integrated) or divests from companies that increase inequality of perpetuate 
social welfare failures (negative/exclusionary). As a result, finance deployed intentionally for 
social impact is sui generis positive social finance. In this context, over the past 20 years, a new 
model of positive social finance has emerged: impact investment. The Global Impact Investing 
37 https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2020/09/19/what-is-the-point-of-green-bonds. 
38  https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/reframing-financing-and-investment-for-a-sustainable-ocean-economy_c59ce972-en and 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/06/world-oceans-day-blue-bonds-can-help-guarantee-the-oceans-wealth/. With support from the World 
Bank, in 2018, the Republic of Seychelles launched the world’s first sovereign Blue Bond raising a total of $15 million to advance the island’s 
blue economy.  
39 https://connect.sustainalytics.com/ebook-how-sustainable-finance-shaping-banking 
8 
Network (GIIN),40 a not-for-profit organization dedicated to building the infrastructure of the field 
via convening and research, defined impact investment as: 
Impact investments are investments made with the intention to generate positive, 
measurable social and environmental impact alongside a financial return. 
More recently, the Global Steering Group for Impact Investment (GSGII),41 a transnational 
coalition of 33 national advisory boards that supports the development of the impact investing field 
globally, has extended this definition: 
Impact investment optimizes risk return and impact to benefit people and the planet. 
It does so by setting specific social and environmental objectives alongside financial 
ones and measuring their achievement. 
The emphasis in both definitions on measurement as an integral element of the impact investment 
model further confirms it as positive social finance that deploys capital to address social issues 
directly.  
A more recent innovation in social finance has been the emergence of social bonds. Social bonds 
are any type of bond where the proceeds will be used exclusively to finance (or refinance) projects 
focused on water infrastructure, health or education sectors, affordable housing, work integration, 
food security, and access to services. Social bonds are designed directly to address or mitigate a 
specific social or environmental issue often involving a particular target population. In 2020, the 
International Capital Market Association (ICMA) published a set of Social Bond Principles,42 with 
four core components to be calibrated to the stated social or environmental purpose of the bond: 
the use of finance, the processes for project evaluation, the management of finance, and the 
reporting impact. 
40 Established in 2009, the Global Impact Investing Network (GIIN) is a not-for-profit organization with 280 members across 41 countries that 
builds industrial infrastructure and supports activities, education, and research to help accelerate the development of the impact investment 
industry. https://thegiin.org. 
41 The GSGII was established in August 2015 as the successor to, and incorporating the work of, the Social Impact Investment Taskforce 
established under the UK presidency of the Group of Eight (G8). Currently, the GSGII’s membership consists of 32 countries plus the EU. 
https://gsgii.org. 
42 https://www.icmagroup.org/green-social-and-sustainability-bonds/social-bond-principles-sbp/. 
9 
C. Governance (Stakeholder) Finance 
Third, governance finance - which is sometimes elided with environmental or social finance -is 
distinctive in that it focuses on stakeholder finance that invests in companies that adhere to 
international standards of employee welfare (such as those set by the International Labour 
Organization),43 or  that have a strategic aim to incorporate elements of purpose44 into their 
governance structures for example, by establishing employee representation on the management 
board (positive/integrated) or divests from those that do not (negative/exclusionary). 
Governance finance relates to the effects of investment on a range of key stakeholders around the 
firm. In this regard, it has many overlaps with the impact objectives of green and social finance, 
both negative and positive. These also link to issues around stakeholder finance that have been 
conceptualized in terms of a wider set of debates around corporate “purpose”.45 However, the most 
distinctive features of positive stakeholder finance relate to organizational ownership and forms of 
legal incorporation. 
In terms of stakeholder ownership, cooperative and mutual finance represent a significant driver 
of stakeholder impact.46 This is a product of investment into an organizational structure, based 
upon equal membership, that is designed to address market failures or pattern of monopsony in 
markets. Cooperatives and mutual organizations play a key role in several impact sectors, 
including housing,47 agriculture,48 health,49 work integration,50 insurance,51 and banking.52 Many 
of these sectors are substantial. For example, the global market share of mutual and cooperative 
insurers stood at 26.7% (2017), in more than 90 countries, with assets worth $8.9 trillion. This 
market employs more than 1 million people and serves 960 million people as members or 
43 https://www.ilo.org/global/lang--en/index.htm. 
44 https://www.hks.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/centers/mrcbg/files/Mayer_2.19.19.transcript.pdf. An good example is the B-Corps model: 
https://bcorporation.net. 
45 https://boardagenda.com/2020/04/07/no-more-business-as-usual-professor-colin-mayer-said-business-school/. 
46 Michie (2015). 
47 https://ldn.coop/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Financing_Co-operative_and_Mutual_Housing-1.pdf. Also, note Big Society Capital’s strategic 
focus on investing in the social housing sector and housing associations: https://bigsocietycapital.com/how-we-work/focus-areas/homes/. 
48 https://www.agweb.com/blog/straight-from-dc-agricultural-perspectives/agricultural-cooperatives-around-the-world. 
49 https://www.un.org/development/desa/cooperatives/wp-content/uploads/sites/25/2019/03/190326_ihco_EGM-nairobi.pdf. 
50 https://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/report/2019/cooperatives-and-social-enterprises-work-and-employment-in-selected-countries. 
51 https://www.thenews.coop/136824/sector/banking-and-insurance/co-operative-mutual-insurers-outperform-insurance-sector-market-share
growth/. 
52 https://economics.rabobank.com/contentassets/95274037ebc548bc99ae02abadf18489/cooperatiestudie-200910_tcm64-94102.pdf. 
10 
policyholders.53 Similarly, the global cooperative banking sector had assets of €7.4 billion 
(2018).54 
In terms of stakeholder forms of incorporation, several legal forms for social purpose organizations 
exists globally that are designed to attract stakeholder focused finance. These include benefit 
corporations (in the United States [US]),55 community interest companies (in the United Kingdom 
[UK]),56 and social cooperatives in Europe.57 Each of these legal forms of incorporation have 
various disclosure and financial requirements that are consistent with being a legitimate social 
purpose organization. For example, community interest companies have an asset lock provisions 
which protects them from a hostile takeover to access the value of a real asset such as property.58
 Figure 3 summarise the categories of sustainable finance as a taxonomy by ESG category and 
investment approach with indicative investee profiles and investment strategies. 
Figure 3: 
53 https://www.icmif.org/publications/financial-insights/global-mutual-and-cooperative-market-infographic-2016. 
54 McKillop et al. (2020). 
55 https://benefitcorp.net. 
56 https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/office-of-the-regulator-of-community-interest-companies. 
57 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/social-economy/cooperatives/european-cooperative-society_en. 
58 In terms of attracting stakeholder finance, community interest companies also attract social investment tax relief 
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/venture-capital-schemes-apply-to-use-social-investment-tax-relief. 
11 
IV THE SPECTRUM OF SUSTAINABLE FINANCE: MARKET SIZE 
An important and distinctive feature of the sustainable finance market is the variety of types of 
capital available to be deployed (and co-invested in blended structures) for sustainable impact. 
These range from grants, foundation assets deployed as program-related investment (PRI) or 
mission-related investment (MRI), sub-market and market return impact investments, 
development finance, green and social bonds, and market rate return screened investments in 
public and private equity and debt. Figure 4 sets out the spectrum of sustainable finance in terms 
of both the broad positive/integrated and negative/exclusionary ESG categories set out above.59 
Figure 3. The Spectrum of Sustainable Finance 
Figure 4: The Spectrum of Sustainable Finance 
ESG = environmental, social, and governance. 
Source: Author’s own research. 
Next, each element of the spectrum is considered, in turn, with respect to the approximate market 
size of each. 
A. 
Grants 
Positive/Integrated Environmental, Social, and Governance Finance: Market Size 
1. 
Grants, which play an important role in structuring blended sustainable finance deals as 
concessionary capital have an expected return of -100% as they are never repaid. The market size 
figure - $75 billion - is approximated from 5% of total foundation assets globally. This is the legal 
59 See: https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2019-green-finance/. 
12 
requirement for charitable status in the US, though not elsewhere.60 This figure also excludes 
government grants to social enterprises, although these may be quite substantial sums. For 
example, the Government of the UK has deployed in excess of £1 billion of public money to 
support the development of the social enterprise sector and impact investing infrastructure since 
2010.61  
2. 
Program-Related Investment and Mission-Related Investment 
PRI and MRI form a part of a foundation’s overall invested assets by using endowment capital to 
generate impact. PRIs typically take the form of debt capital to fund programmatic activities, often 
in concert with grants, and may make a financial return.62 In the US, PRIs can be included in the 
annual 5% allocation of “grant” capital. 63 MRIs take the form of debt or equity and typically aim 
to further the foundation’s mission and make a competitive financial return.64 Potentially, the 
potential market size of MRI investments could equal the total assets of all foundations, or roughly 
$1.5 trillion globally.65  
3. 
Impact Investing  
Following the definition noted above, in the 2020 annual report, the GIIN estimated the core 
impact investing market size at $715 billion of assets under management in 2020.66 However, the 
60 Calculating the total value of philanthropic assets globally is difficult, since there is no single data set available. This figure is, therefore, an 
estimate based upon P. Johnson. 2018. Global Philanthropy Report (Hauser Institute for Civil Society) valuation of global foundation assets at 
$1.5 trillion, see https://cpl.hks.harvard.edu/files/cpl/files/global_philanthropy_report_final_april_2018.pdf.  This is likely to a larger figure in 
2020. 
61 This figure includes: the endowment of UnLtd (£100 million); grants from the Futurebuilders (£215 million) and Investment and Contract 
Readiness (£60 million) Funds; co-investments with Bridges Fund Management (>£20 million); unclaimed bank account assets to the Reclaim 
Fund (> £ 850 million) of which Big Society Capital has deployed > £600 million to 2019. 
62 In the USA, the IRS defines PRIs ‘as investments in which: the primary purpose is to accomplish one or more of the foundation's exempt 
purposes; production of income or appreciation of property is not a significant purpose; influencing legislation or taking part in political 
campaigns on behalf of candidates is not a purpose. In determining whether a significant purpose of an investment is the production of income or 
the appreciation of property, it is relevant whether investors who engage in investments only for profit would be likely to make the investment on 
the same terms as the private foundation. If an investment incidentally produces significant income or capital appreciation, this is not, in the 
absence of other factors, conclusive evidence that a significant purpose is the production of income or the appreciation of property. To be 
program-related, the investments must significantly further the foundation's exempt activities.  They must be investments that would not have 
been made except for their relationship to the exempt purposes. Examples include: low-interest or interest-free loans to needy students; high-risk 
investments in non-profit low-income housing projects,; low-interest loans to small businesses owned by members of economically 
disadvantaged groups, where commercial funds at reasonable interest rates are not readily available; investments in businesses in low-income 
areas (both domestic and foreign) under a plan to improve the economy of the area by providing employment or training for unemployed 
residents; investments in non-profit organizations combating community deterioration. See: https://www.irs.gov/charities-non-profits/private
foundations/program-related-investments. 
63 Government of the UK guidelines. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/charities-and-investment-matters-a-guide-for-trustees
cc14/charities-and-investment-matters-a-guide-for-trustees. 
64 R. Henriques, A. Nath, C. Cote-Ackah, and K. Rosqueta. 2016. Programme Related Investments: Is there a Bigger Opportunity for Mission 
Investing by Private Foundations? The Centre for High Impact Philanthropy, University of Pennsylvania. https://www.impact.upenn.edu/wp
content/uploads/2016/04/160415PRIFINALAH-print.pdf. 
65 For pioneers in using MRI as 100% of assets: KL Felicitas Foundation (https://klfelicitasfoundation.org); FB Heron Foundation 
(https://www.heron.org); T100 (https://toniic.com/t100/); and the Ford Foundation’s decision to engage in MRI 
(https://www.marketplace.org/2020/07/02/ford-foundation-darren-walker-charitable-organizations-philanthropy-economy-social-bonds/). 
66 https://thegiin.org/research/publication/impinv-survey-2020. 
13 
survey data will, likely, under-estimate the total market size as it is based on a sample of only 290 
respondents. Of these assets, 37% was invested through private debt, which also accounted for 
well more than half (61%) of the number of investments made. Publicly traded debt accounted for 
nearly a quarter of the total volume of capital invested (16% of transactions), and private equity 
comprised 16% (11% of transactions). The overall average deal size was relatively small - at $5 
million - across all asset classes. 76% of investments were directly into companies, projects, or 
real assets. By asset class, the average deal size was largest among investments in real assets ($28 
million), followed by public equity ($22 million), private equity ($ 7 million), and publicly traded 
debt ($7 million). In terms of investors, the largest group was pension funds (18% of total 
investments). In terms of investments, energy was the largest sector (16% of total investments). 
55% of all investment went into “mature” public and private companies. In terms of sectors, the 
GIIN (2020) data suggested that the categories of impact investments were evenly spread between 
energy (16% of all investments), financial services (12%), forestry (910%), food and agriculture 
(9%), and microfinance (8%).  
According to the GIIN (2020) survey, 67% of its sample investors expected market-rate returns, 
whilst 18% aimed for close to market rate returns and 15% accepted below-market-rate returns 
(but close to capital preservation). This data suggests that impact investing can be either impact 
first (with sub-market returns) or finance first (with market returns) depending on the structure of 
the fund/deal and investor expectations.67 In terms of expected financial returns, foundations, 
not-for-profit asset managers, and family offices were largely “impact first” and would accept 
some sub-market rate investments. On the other hand, pension funds, insurance companies, for
profit asset managers, and DFIs were “finance first” and generally expected market returns.  
4. 
Development Finance 
Development finance is increasingly being categorized as a form of sustainable finance.68 This 
sector includes multinational agencies, such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB); Inter
67 The GIIN Annual Impact Investor Survey 2020 included data from 294 impact investors. In terms of returns, 67% of this sample suggested 
that their investments achieved market rate returns, 18% achieved below market rate returns (but close to the market rate) and 15% achieved 
below market rate returns (closer to capital preservation) see: https://thegiin.org/impact-investing/need-to-know/%23s2. 
68 In earlier estimates of the size of the impact investing market, development finance was typically excluded. The GIIN Annual Impact Investor 
Survey 2019. 
https://thegiin.org/assets/GIIN_2019%20Annual%20Impact%20Investor%20Survey_ExecSumm_webfile.pdf. However, the 2019 GIIN report 
estimated the market to be 239 billion, whereas the 2020 report estimated the size to be 404 billion. The large increase appears, at least partly, 
to be a consequence of the inclusion of some DFIs in the 2020 survey sample for the first time. 
14 
American Development Bank and the International Finance Corporation (IFC); regional agencies, 
such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development; and national agencies, such as 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the UK.69 There is no single data set for all 
development finance, but the IFC (2019)70 suggested that the 25 Harmonized Indicators for Private 
Sector Operations signatory DFIs could be seen as impact investors with total assets under 
management of $742 billion. 
5.   
Positive/Integrated Sustainable Finance 
The central element of the positive/integrated ESG finance market is sustainable bonds. The 
sustainable bond market has grown substantially since 2015 (Figure 5), driven primarily by green 
bonds. By the second half of 2021, sustainability bond issuance had reached $91bn an increase 
of 131% compared with the same period in 2020.71 
Figure 5: Growth of Sustainable Bonds, 2015-2021 
Source: Refinitiv1 
69 CDC’s positioning of its investments within an ESG framework. https://toolkit.cdcgroup.com. 
70 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/66e30dce-0cdd-4490-93e4-d5f895c5e3fc/The-Promise-of-Impact
Investing.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=mHZTSds. 
71 See: https://www.refinitiv.com/perspectives/market-insights/sustainable-finance-surges-in-popularity-during-h1-2021/ 
15 
i. 
Green Bonds 
By the first half of 2021, $227.8bn green bonds had been issued meaning that the total 
cumulative green bond volume was 1.4tn. This represents a 49% growth rate in the period 2016
2021.The projected forecast for full year 2021 was $400-$450bn. 
In 2019, $257.7 billion of green bonds were issued globally- a growth of 51% on the 2018 total of 
$167.3 billion. Of these, Europe accounted for 45% while the Asia and Pacific market issued 25% 
with the People’s Republic of China (PRC) the largest Asian issuer.72  
In 2019, the largest cumulative issuers of green bonds were the US Federal National Mortgage 
Association ($22.8 billion), the German Reconstruction Credit Institute ($9.02 billion), the Dutch 
State Treasury Agency ($6.66 billion), France ($6.57 billion), and the Industrial and Commercial 
Bank of China ($5.85 billion) (footnote 75). Moreover, in 2019, a survey of 135 hedge funds in 13 
countries with assets under management of $6.25 trillion, 84% reported “an increased interest in 
ESG-orientated funds and strategies over the last 12 months”.73 All the major global stock 
exchanges have listings for green bonds as public debt.74
 ii. 
Social Bonds 
The first social bond was issued by the Instituto de Credito in Spain in 2015. It focused on offering 
sub-market loans to small and medium-sized organizations in deprived areas with the aim of 
accelerating economic growth and creating local jobs. The 3-year social bond raised €1 billion 
from a range of international investors. Also, in 2015, this was followed by a second €1 billion 
Spanish social bond issued by Kutxabank to provide affordable housing in the Basque country.75 
In 2017, the IFC launched a Social Bond Program that offered investors an opportunity to allocate 
social bond investments that are focused on the SDGs with a triple A-rated credit risk. Finance 
from the bonds focused on supporting banking for women and inclusive business programs, which 
benefit underserved populations in emerging markets, including women and low-income 
communities with limited access to essential services, such as basic infrastructure and finance. By 
2020, the IFC had issued 39 social bonds that raised $3.1 billion.76  
72 https://www.climatebonds.net/resources/reports/2019-green-bond-market-summary. 
73 https://www.cnbc.com/2020/02/14/esg-investing-numbers-suggest-green-investing-mega-trend-is-here.html. 
74 https://www.forbes.com/sites/brendancoffey/2019/11/12/esg-stocks-are-having-a-fantastic-year/?sh=6fd53e352fbb; and 
https://www.climatebonds.net/green-bond-segments-stock-exchanges. 
75 https://www.gbm.hsbc.com/-/media/gbm/reports/insights/social-bonds.pdf. 
76 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new/investor+relations/ir
products/socialbonds. 
16 
In 2020, the SDG Impact project, within the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 
launched a set of SDG Impact Standards for Bonds.77 These standards contained six standards 
under four topic areas: strategic intent and impact goal setting, impact measurement and 
management, transparency and comparability, and context and governance.  
By 2020, total issuance had reached $33.1 billion, up from $6.2 billion in 2019. This accounted 
for 28% of the total sustainable finance bond market.78 However, as the social bond market grew, 
there has been an increasing demand for standards of impact reporting and disclosure.79  
6. 
Negative/Exclusionary Sustainable Finance 
By 2021, the global total of assets under management that followed some form of ESG screen80 - 
including sector, corporate practices, norms-based analysis against global standards 
(International Labour Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund [UNICEF], Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development), and the level of ESG integration in corporate strategy - amounted to $37.8 trillion - a growth of over 24% since 2018. It has been estimated that by 2025, 
ESG assets will reach $53 trillion or over a third of the projected $140.5 trillion global total.81 
Data also suggests that the majority of ESG investment is into public equity and fixed income 
debt- categories that indicate a focus on mainstream businesses that are publicly listed. Following 
the logic of the Double Delta model, these ESG investments are not materially impactful (Figure 
6). 
77 https://sdgimpact.undp.org/assets/SDG-Impact-Standards-for-Bonds_First-Public-Consultation-Draft.pdf. 
78 https://cib.bnpparibas.com/sustain/capital-markets-and-covid-19-have-social-bonds-come-of-age-_a-3-3503.html. 
79 https://www.sustainalytics.com/sustainable-finance/social-bonds/?utm_term=&utm_campaign=Leads-Search
20&utm_source=adwords&utm_medium=ppc&hsa_acc=4619360780&hsa_cam=11145778763&hsa_grp=108965194933&hsa_ad=46592933
 5428&hsa_src=g&hsa_tgt=dsa
437115340933&hsa_kw=&hsa_mt=b&hsa_net=adwords&hsa_ver=3&gclid=Cj0KCQjwufn8BRCwARIsAKzP695DhC7NGecVbGtOT9i
GUr-J5f81BjR3oE_FH11KyEESpDqBOS96uoaAhQ7EALw_wcB. 
80 See: https://www.dbresearch.com/PROD/RPS_EN
PROD/PROD0000000000518186/What_are_exclusionary_trends_in_sustainable_invest.PDF?undefined&realload=5j7GoVKHGYdG6mBbmrH
 kWdv4hdTuOXLDdd8bSSJmJdt8wr2riZBfuM/OGUlDefoq 
81 See: https://www.bloomberg.com/professional/blog/esg-assets-may-hit-53-trillion-by-2025-a-third-of-global-aum/ 
17 
18 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Global Sustainable Finance Asset Allocation, 2018  
 
                           PE = private equity, VC = venture capital  
                           Source: GSI Alliance (2018). 
 
In terms of geography, the European ESG market focused mainly on an exclusionary approach, 
whereas the US market focused more on ESG integration (Figure 7). 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Sustainable Assets by Thematic Approach and Region, 2018 
 
     ESG = environmental, social, and governance. 
     Source: GSI Alliance (2018). 
 
 
Figure 8 summarizes the market sizes across the spectrum of sustainable finance. 
 
Public  
equity 
51% 
Fixed 
income 36% 
Real 
estate/property 
3% 
 Figure 6: Global Sustainable Finance Allocation, 2018 
 
Figure 8: The Spectrum of Sustainable Finance: Approximate Market Size 
V. THE SPECTRUM OF SUSTAINABLE FINANCE: RETURNS 
A. 
Positive/Integrated Environmental, Social, Governance Finance: Returns 
In terms of returns on investment, a key feature of the spectrum of sustainable finance is that it 
includes finance with a wide range of return expectations. At one extreme, grants expect a zero 
return and, on the other, negative/exclusionary ESG funds can achieve above market returns. 
However, with the exception of the GIIN data on the two forms of impact investing (impact first 
and finance first), there are no consolidated data sets for the returns of other types of capital in the 
spectrum. As such, the returns presented here have been estimated from available sources and 
should be seen as indicative. 
B. 
Grants and Program Related Investment 
As 100% loss finance, grants play an important role both as start-up risk capital and as 
concessionary sustainable finance within blended finance structures and deals. The returns to PRI 
may vary between loss-making to market rate returns (more typical in the US) under the conditions 
that were noted above. For example, KL Felicitas Foundation, which aims to invest 100% of its 
assets as impact, reported a 2.5% per annum loss on its PRIs.82  
C. 
Impact Investment 
82 https://www.thinknpc.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/In-pursuit-of-deep-impact_NPC_KLF-Digital-1.pdf. 
19 
In terms of impact investment returns, the GIIN 2020 survey separated out the investment data 
into either ‘developed market” or “emerging market” categories, and then by type of finance (as 
annualized, realized, and gross returns).83  In developed markets, the average actual return with an 
expected market rate return was 16% from private equity, 13% from real assets, and 8% from 
private debt. In emerging markets, the average actual return with an expected market rate return 
was 18% from private equity, 10% from private debt, and 8% from real assets. While these returns 
look broadly in line with the typical market rate returns on mainstream private equity84 and private 
debt,85 important empirical questions remain concerning whether these returns are properly risk
adjusted, given the typically non-financialized impact risk variable in the overall capital 
structure.86 Across the GIIN 2020 survey sample, more than 50% of respondents saw a severe or 
moderate financial risk in several categories of performance, including business execution and 
management risk (23%+54%), country and currency risk (18%+40%), macroeconomic risk 
(17%+49%), financing risk (13%+46%), and market demand and competition risk (9%+44%). 
In developed markets, the average actual return with an expected below-market rate return was 
10% from private equity and 7% from private debt. In emerging markets, the average actual return 
with an expected below-market rate return was 11% for private equity and 8% for private debt. In 
both below-market scenarios, real assets did not expect a sub-market return. The GIIN data also 
suggested that the majority of its sample investors’ financial returns were either “in line with” or 
“outperforming” expectations, with only 12% reporting that they were “underperforming”. 
D. 
Mission-Related Investment  
MRIs typically seek market returns.87 However, against this assumption and aside from PRIs, KL 
Felicitas Foundation’s overall endowment returned only 2.75% per annum as MRI. This could be 
seen as indicative of a lower threshold for MRI returns. 
83 The median age of inception of the investments in the sample was 2011. 
84 Average returns globally from 2009 to 2019 were 15.3%. https://www.marketwatch.com/story/private-equity-returns-have-gone-up-that-may
not-last-2020-06-18. 
85 The average return in private debt globally from 1998 to 2016 was between 10% and 15%. https://www.ipe.com/research-the-rise-of-private
debt/10012090.article. However, the COVID-19 pandemic will likely severely affect more recent returns. 
https://www.fnlondon.com/articles/private-debt-funds-set-for-worst-performance-since-the-global-financial-crisis-20200807. 
86 Interestingly, however, there are some data that suggest that impact finance outperforms the market. This may be for several reasons, including 
overall better risk management (ESG funds: https://www.ft.com/content/733ee6ff-446e-4f8b-86b2-19ef42da3824); exploiting new, growth 
markets (green finance: https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2019-green-finance/); and lack of correlation with market risk (microfinance: 
https://www.triodos.co.uk/ethical-investments/microfinance-fund/LU0842307588). 
87 As a benchmark, the average market returns over 10 years to June 2020 were S&P 500 14.7% and DOW Jones Industrial 15.04%. 
https://www.wealthsimple.com/en-us/learn/average-stock-market-return. 
20 
E. 
Development Finance 
Generally, aside from direct grants, development finance seeks a market return. Development 
finance returns can be estimated from some of the larger players in the market. For example, the 
IFC recorded an average return on assets in a range of 0.1%–1.6% between 2015 and 2019,88 
whereas CDC returned an average 10.3% in 2012–2016.89 Further, an analysis of the equity returns 
on IFC, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the Netherlands 
Development Finance Company (FMO) showed an average of 10% between 2003 and 2015.90  
F. 
Green and Social Bonds 
The data on the pricing of green bonds remains mixed.91 But some analysis suggests that the 
pricing does not typically reflect any sort of risk premium.92 As such, returns are typically close 
to conventional bonds which have been between zero and 2% over the past 5 years.93 For example, 
in 2020, Barclays issued a £400 million, 6-year, green bond to support climate-related products 
and initiatives with an annual yield of 1.70%.94 
While the available data is more limited for social bonds, they seem to follow a similar pricing 
profile to green bonds without any risk premium. For example, in 2020, Assura issued a £300 
million, 10-year, social bond with an annual yield of 1.5%.95  
G. 
Negative Environmental, Social, and Governance Finance96 
In terms of the returns on negative/exclusionary ESG finance, the available data suggests that the 
top-performing stocks returned between 12% and 16% in 2018–2019 (Figure 9). This compares to 
a 29% growth in the S&P 500 for the same period.97 
88 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/annual+report/financials. 
89 https://www.devex.com/news/financial-returns-likely-to-go-down-over-next-5-years-says-cdc-chair-92943. 
90 https://publications.iadb.org/publications/english/document/Comparative-Study-of-Equity-Investing-in-Development-Finance-Institutions.pdf. 
91 https://www.mdpi.com/1911-8074/13/9/193. 
92 https://blogs.cfainstitute.org/investor/2019/10/08/green-bonds-vs-traditional-bonds. 
93 https://www.climatebonds.net/files/reports/cbi_gb_pricing_2h2018_08052019.pdf. 
94 https://home.barclays/news/press-releases/2020/10/barclays-raises-p400m-through-second--green-bond--issue-/. 
95 https://www.investegate.co.uk/assura-plc/rns/pricing-of--300m-social-bond/202009081619503846Y/. 
96 https://www.institutionalinvestor.com/article/b1m8spzx5bp6g7/Private-Equity-Makes-ESG-Promises-But-Their-Impact-Is-Often-Superficial. 
97 https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/sp-500-2019-annual-return-for-year-best-since-2013-2019-12-1028790061? 
21 
Figure 9: Returns on Top Ten ESG Funds 2018-2019 
Figure 10. Returns on Top Ten Environmental, Social, and Governance Funds, 2018–2019 
Source: Financial Times Advisor                   
(https://www.ftadviser.com/investments/2019/10/10/esg-investing-provides
strong-returns/).  
However, Barclays Bank analysis of the ESG performance of their funds between 2013 and 2020, 
showed rough parity between ESG and non-ESG equity returns, averaging about 18% annual 
growth (Figure 10).  
22 
23 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Environmental, Social, and Governance−Non-Environmental, Social, and 
Governance Equity Performance 
 
ESG = environmental, social, and governance.  
Note: The sample period is from January 2013 to February 2020.  The figure displays total returns (net of fees) 
where returns are averaged by month and fund type.  Funds with assets under management larger than £100 million 
are included in the sample. 
Source: EPFR, Barclay’s Research (https://www.investmentbank.barclays.com/our-insights/3-point-perspective/esg
funds-looking-beyond-the-label.html?cid=paidsearch-). 
 
 
Similarly, the MSCI ESG Leaders Indices generally performed well against the main index over a 
10-year period (Figure 11). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11: 
Figure 10. Performance of MSCI World Index versus MSCI Environmental, Social, and 
Governance Leaders Indices Gross Annualized Returns, 2009-2019 
ESG = environmental, social, and governance; MSCI = Morgan Stanley Capital International. 
Source: MSCI, Davy Global Fund Management (https://www.davygfm.com/insights/esg-investing-series/the
returns-and-fundamentals-of-esg-integrated-investing.html).  
Table 2 summarizes the spectrum of social finance in terms of market size and returns. 
Type of Finance 
Table 2: Spectrum of Social Finance Returns 
Approximate Market Size 
Estimated Returns 
($) 
Grants 
75 billion 
(%) 
Program-related investment -100 
75 billion 
Impact investment: Impact first -2.5 to Market Rate 
134 billion 
Impact investment: Finance first 
7–11 
270 billion 
Mission-related investment 
8–18 
1.5 trillion 
Development finance 
2.75–15.00 
742 billion 
Positive/integrated ESG 
10 
1.4 trillion 
Negative/exclusionary ESG 
0–2 
37.8 trillion 
ESG = environmental, social, and governance. 
Source: Author’s own research. 
10–18 
24 
Figure 12 sets out the spectrum of sustainable finance with approximate market size and estimated 
returns. 
VI.  MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE 
A. 
Green and Social Bonds 
Most mainstream investment banks have developed bespoke ESG equity and debt funds. For 
example, JP Morgan,98 Barclays,99 UBS,100 and Credit Suisse101 all offer a range of ESG or impact 
investing funds. In 2020, Credit Suisse launched the Environmental Impact Equity Fund.102 The 
secondary market for ESG equity and green bonds is also developing.103 Several green bond 
indexes have been established. The Solactive Green Bond Index104 uses rules-based, market
weighted calculations to track the performance of its bonds. The S&P Green Bond Index105 
includes labelled green bonds by issuers who demonstrate a robust and audited performance 
disclosure framework. The Bloomberg Barclays MSCI Green Bond Index includes corporate, 
government, and securitized green bonds with an investment grade and fixed coupon rate.106
 98 https://privatebank.jpmorgan.com/gl/en/services/investing/sustainable-investing/impact-investing. 
99 https://www.barclays.co.uk/smart-investor/investments/funds-etfs-and-investment-trusts/impact-investing-funds-and-etfs/. 
100 https://www.ubs.com/uk/en/asset-management/institutional-investors/investment-themes/sustainable-impact-investing.html. 
101 https://www.credit-suisse.com/uk/en/private-banking/secure-your-legacy/sustainable-investing.html. 
102 https://www.credit-suisse.com/pwp/am/downloads/marketing/br_lu2176897911_uk_csam_en_web.pdf. 
103 https://www.mdpi.com/1911-8074/13/9/193. 
104 https://www.solactive.com/?allgemein/lithium-reporting/?lang=DE000A1EY8J4&index=DE000SLA0FS4. 
105 https://www.spglobal.com/spdji/en/indices/fixed-income/sp-green-bond-index/#overview. 
106https://www.msci.com/documents/1296102/11926825/Bloomberg+Barclays+MSCI+US+Aggregate+ESG+Choice+Bond+Index_Fact+Sheet.p
 df/bff9fd82-396d-ab79-3b7d-cfdecd5d3dea 
25 
B. 
Impact Investment 
With respect to the impact investment market, the infrastructure still lacks many of the components 
of a fully functioning financial market, such as agreed impact performance metrics, listings on 
debt or equity public markets, and retail investment instruments.107 Specifically, the intermediary 
landscape of impact investment remains relatively underdeveloped. 
Nevertheless, several pioneering organizations have played an important role in developing the 
market. The UK lead the way in building the institutional infrastructure as a consequence of 
consolidated government policy support since 2010.108 Between 2010 and 2015, the UK 
Government supported the establishment of the world’s first impact investing wholesale 
investment bank - Big Society Capital - the first bespoke fund manager - Bridges Ventures (now 
Bridges Fund Management), and the first bespoke consultancy - Social Finance.109 In addition, the 
Government of the UK used public finance to set up several social venture funds such, as UnLtd, 
the Social Investment Business,110 and Futurebuilders.111 In 2010, with the support of the Ministry 
of Justice, Government of the UK launched the first social impact bond (SIB) focused on 
supporting ex-offenders in Peterborough Prison.112 After this, the government introduced a range 
of publicly financed outcomes funds specifically designed to support the development of SIBs 
mobilizing more than £240 million. Finally, the UK also pioneered several other bespoke impact 
investing policy initiatives. Outside of the direct influence of the government, the UK has also 
seen other innovative, private, impact investing organizations emerge, most notably the first, 
specialist, impact investing bank—ClearlySo.113 
Subsequent to these UK initiatives, other countries have adopted or are developing several of the 
innovations. These include exploring accessing dormant bank accounts to capitalize an impact 
investing wholesale bank in the Republic of Korea114 and Japan115, and widespread adoption of 
impact bonds.116  
107 https://medium.com/impact-engine/mind-the-gaps-whats-missing-in-impact-investing-markets-525f9ea16491. 
108 Nicholls and Teasdale (2017; 2020). 
109 https://www.socialfinance.org.uk. 
110 https://www.sibgroup.org.uk. 
111 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Futurebuilders_England. The Futurebuilders fund was later managed by the Social Investment Business. 
112 Nicholls and Tomkinson (2015). 
113 www.clearlyso.com. 
114 https://www.kif.re.kr/kif3/eng/search/total_search?SearchText1=dormant. 
115 https://www.responsible-investor.com/articles/jap-soc. 
116 https://golab.bsg.ox.ac.uk/knowledge-bank/indigo-data-and-visualisation/impact-bond-dataset-v2/. 
26 
VII. INNOVATIVE INSTRUMENTS117
 An important feature of the sustainable finance market has been the development of innovative 
financial instruments and deal/fund structures. Central to these innovations has been the range of 
sustainable finance models set out in the sustainable finance spectrum from 100% loss grants to 
market rate return investments (Figure 11). The opportunities offered by this spectrum are twofold. 
First, sustainable finance models can drive the development of new instruments that would be 
unavailable to the mainstream when they do not conform to standard models of risk-adjusted 
returns. Second, the spectrum of sustainable finance offers opportunities for “blended” deal/fund 
structures that bring together multiple forms of impact investing, with different impact-return 
appetites, to leverage the capital of each individual investor further in co-investment models. 
A. 
Liquidity and Exit 
In common with the mainstream, sustainable investors can use equity and debt models; but, unlike 
the mainstream, they can also deploy impact first—concessionary priced instruments—as well as 
grants. The majority of impact investing capital in the 2020 GIIN survey was deployed as private 
debt (37%) and private equity (16%). However, public listings are also evident in the GIIN sample, 
including publicly traded debt at 24% and public equity at 10%.118 Nevertheless, despite this 
evidence of the use of public equity, to date, there is no fully functioning “impact” stock 
exchange,119 though there are placement intermediaries, such as ClearlySo in Europe, and the 
Impact Investing Exchange (IIX) in Asia.120 Indeed, the lack of liquidity and difficulty of exit 
(initial public offerings are very rare in this sector)121 was considered a “moderate” or “severe 
risk” by 68% of all the GIIN 2020 sample. In this context, innovation has tended to focus on 
alternative (and typically “responsible”) strategies exit.122  
117This section draws extensively on Patton-Power (2020:1). https://impactalpha.com/incentives-for-driving-impact-in-deal-and-fund-structures/; 
and Patton-Power (2020:2). https://impactalpha.com/10-ways-to-redesign-venture-finance-for-a-more-inclusive-post-covid-world/. 
118 These exits are typically in established sectors with a track record of impact investments achieving scale, such as microfinance, green 
technologies, and health interventions, though, for interesting innovations, see the Women’s Livelihood Bond: https://iixglobal.com/wp
content/uploads/2019/02/IIX-Foundation_WLB-Final-Blueprint-Paper_FEB-2019.pdf and Retail Charity Bonds, https://allia.org.uk/about
us/#history-row. 
119 Though an abortive attempt at such an exchange was launched in 2007: https://www.ethex.org.uk/towards-a-social-stock-exchange_46.html. 
120 https://iixglobal.com. See also: https://www.svx.ca. 
121 https://www.csrwire.com/press_releases/39700-first-benefit-corporation-goes-public-laureate-education. 
122 https://privateequity.weil.com/thought-leadership/private-equity-and-impact-investing-rethinking-exit-opportunities/; and 
https://thegiin.org/research/publication/responsible-exits. 
27 
1. 
Revenue-Based Models 
For example, revenue-based models create progressive liquidity via pre-agreed redemptions of 
equity or dividends paid on “growth” metrics, such as revenue, free cash flow, or net profitability. 
In this way, a private equity investment could be structured so that agreed cash dividends are paid 
based on free cash flow up to the point where the aggregate dividends paid reach an agreed multiple 
of the original investment. At this point, the investee enterprise could redeem the underlying shares 
at their original price or at an agreed multiple. This model reduces the downside risk to the private 
equity investor if a standard exit is unlikely to be available within a reasonable time frame. For the 
investee, this model has the advantage over debt in that it only requires payments when there is 
available capital, plus it does not introduce the risk of using assets as security. Another innovative 
exit strategy is via a mandatory share redemption agreement. Such redemptions can be structured 
in increments over the total investment period at a predetermined price and frequency based on 
cash flow.123 In these ways, linking liquidity rights to financial performance can benefit both the 
impact investor and investee in terms of managing risk and optimizing the timescale of investment 
and exit. An alternative use of the revenue participation model has been to convert debt into 
equity.124 This can be structured as debt linked to a right to purchase equity. In 2015, Barclay’s 
launched a High Growth and Entrepreneurs Fund, backed by £100 million from the EIB. The fund 
aimed primarily at job creation in the UK and provided early-stage venture debt capital to growth
stage businesses with an option to buy equity. In 2016 Barclays increased the fund to £200 million. 
B. 
Quasi-Equity 
Another innovative instrument developed by impact investors is quasi-equity, which is a form of 
debt finance that combines some of the benefits of equity with a loan.125 Quasi-equity models 
typically share the risk and reward of an investment between investors as another form of revenue 
participation focused on debt. Quasi-equity is usually structured as a loan where the financial 
return (effectively the interest rate or cost of capital) is calculated as a percentage of the investee’s 
123 For example, in 2016, the Acumen Fund invested $460,000 in Gigante Central Wet Mill with a deal structured as a blend of debt and equity. 
Under the investment terms, Gigante Central Wet Mill deposited the cash flow above an agreed working capital amount into a reserve account. 
This account was then used to buy back Acumen Fund’s equity stake at an agreed price equal to Acumen Fund’s invested capital plus an 
agreed annual return. The account also paid off the debt with a 2-year grace period. https://privateequity.weil.com/thought-leadership/private
equity-and-impact-investing-rethinking-exit-opportunities/. 
124 For example, Adobe Capital (Mexico) has used revenue-based debt to allocate capital into growth impact enterprises since 2012. These 
agreements are convertible to equity based on the amount of debt outstanding. The value to entrepreneurs is that they provide access to less
dilutive risk capital which does not require follow-on debt refinancing. Contrary to traditional debt, these contracts typically offer flexible 
payment schedules and, sometimes, an initial grace period. 
125 https://knowhow.ncvo.org.uk/funding/social-investment-1/investment-types/quasi-equity-revenue-participation#. 
28 
future revenue streams. A quasi-equity investment can be a useful source of finance when 
conventional debt financing is too expensive (for example, where there is a high-risk premium) or 
too risky (for example, asset-backed finance) for a social enterprise or where share capital may not 
be possible because of the investee’s legal structure (for example, a registered charity). Unlike a 
conventional loan, the cost of capital of quasi-equity is dependent on the financial performance of 
the organization. If future expected financial performance is not achieved, a lower or possibly zero 
financial return is paid to the investor. Conversely, if enterprise performance is better than 
expected, then a higher financial return may be payable. A quasi-equity investment may be 
structured so that its return is capped (for example, revenue participation payments cannot exceed 
twice the original investment size), or be limited in duration (for example, the right to revenue 
participation is extinguished after a specified time period).  
1. 
Hackney Community Transport 
Quasi-equity can also be used to reward impact performance when this is directly linked to 
financial performance. For example, in the UK, the Hackney Community Transport (HCT) group 
(a social enterprise bus company in London)126 raised £4.145 million in a combination of a fixed 
loan (5% for 5 years £2.128 million) and a quasi-equity social loan (£1.917 million).127 The social 
loan allowed investors to share in both the risks and the returns of HCT. If HCT did not reach an 
agreed threshold of growth, there would be zero returns to the investors, but the upside returns 
could exceed the 5% fixed loan since the contract specified an uncapped 1 percentage share of 
every £1 million increase in revenues generated over an agreed threshold. The social loan was 
defined as such because HCT’s impact was a direct consequence of its financial performance: it 
used its surplus from running bus contracts to subsidize community transport for those who could 
not easily access transport and who often had mobility issues. Therefore, as it grew its core 
business, HCT would increase its impact in terms of its other (discounted or free) services.128 
2. 
Acumen Fund 
126 http://hctgroup.org. 
127 There were four investors: Bridges Social Entrepreneurs Fund; Social Investment Business, Futurebuilders Fund; Big Issue Invest, Social 
Enterprise Loan Fund; and Rathbone Greenbank. The deal was brokered by ClearlySo. 
128 Hill (2011). 
29 
The Acumen Fund developed their own version of quasi-equity characterized as “patient 
capital”.129 Patient capital is typically a high-risk, long-term, and early-stage growth capital 
structured as debt or equity. Acumen focuses its investments primarily on access to health 
care, water, housing, alternative energy, or agricultural inputs with typical investments 
between $300,000 and $2.5 million over 7–10 years. 
3. 
European Union 
In the EU context, the EIB supported a quasi-equity investment in Heliatek, a world leader in 
organic photovoltaic and a manufacturer of solar films. As a part of a €80 million round of growth 
finance, the EIB contributed a €20 million loan, from its European Fund for Strategic 
Investments,130 in conjunction with five other investors who raised €42 million in equity. There 
were also €18 million in subsidies from the State of Saxony and the European Regional 
Development Fund.131 
4. 
Calvert Foundation 
In 1995, in contrast to these fund-based models, the Calvert Foundation developed a retail product 
that offers individual investors a customizable debt impact investment—the Calvert Community 
Investment Note.132 The notes can be purchased in increments of $1,000, and investors can choose 
the region and program focus of their investment. Further, the investor can choose the maturity of 
the note from 1 year to 15 years, and the interest rate from 0.5% to 3.5%. By 2020, the note had 
raised $478 million to be deployed to community development financial intermediaries and social 
enterprises in the US. 
C. 
Guarantees 
Often using grant capital, 133 equity or debt guarantees allow (typically foundation) funders to 
leverage their balance sheet by de-risking deals and, as a result, bring in other investors.134 In 
addition, guarantees also lower the overall cost of capital to the investee below the risk-adjusted 
market rate. Another example is forgivable loan that functions as debt that can be converted to 
129 https://acumen.org/about/patient-capital/. 
130 https://www.eib.org/en/efsi/index. 
131 https://www.eib.org/en/press/all/2016-213-heliatek-raises-eur80-million-to-finance-large-manufacturing-expansion-and-support-worldwide
market-development. 
132 https://www.calvertimpactcapital.org/invest. 
133 As noted above, venture philanthropy also typically brings in pro bono technical support and networking as well as long-term grants. 
134 GIIN survey of US guarantees: https://thegiin.org/assets/GIIN_Issue_Brief_Guarantees_final%20for%20web.pdf. 
30 
grant. This can act as an incentive for enterprises to maintain their impact objectives ahead of profit 
maximization, for example, to maintain workforce levels under financial stress, and is often used 
by governments.135 There are also examples of convertible grant that turn grant into equity.136 This 
instrument can be used to fund very early-stage enterprises to develop their ideas before seeking 
investment capital. Typically, if a grantee succeeds in fundraising follow-on equity capital, then the 
grant-maker recovers its fund as an equity buy-out and can then recycle its capital to invest in new 
innovations. In contrast, recoverable grants explicitly aim to recycle capital typically when an 
enterprise reaches an agreed valuation, level of revenue, or net profit.137 The GECES Working 
Group within the EU also discussed a number of these models.138 
VIII. INNOVATIVE STRUCTURES 
Related to these innovations in the instruments for sustainable finance are opportunities for 
innovative impact deal and fund structures supported by catalytic capital, specifically subordinated 
and first loss debt and guarantees.139 Further, these structures typically bring in a range of investors 
with different risk-return (and impact) profiles as a form of blended finance.140 The great 
opportunity offered by these blended funds is to leverage in commercial capital that typically looks 
for a market return into impact deals that would not provide such a return without the other 
subordinate investors. In this sense, the structuring of blended funds and deals should bring in 
additional commercial capital that, otherwise, would not be deployed for impact. 
A. 
Blended Capital 
In 2013, the UK Cabinet Office Report provided the first overview of the various emergent forms 
of blended funds described as “co-mingling”.141 The report identified three types of co-mingling 
fund: pari-passu, risk-reward, and but-for. With pari-passu funds, all investors come in on equal 
135 For example, the use under the Paycheck Protection Program in the US: https://bluedotlaw.com/forgivable-loans/. 
136 https://philanthropy-impact.org/article/full-spectrum-finance-how-philanthropy-discovers-impact-beyond-donation-and-investments. 
137 https://echoinggreen.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Echoing-Green-Recoverable-Grant-FAQ-UPDATED-2019.pdf. 
138 https://evpa.eu.com/news/2017/improving-access-to-funding-a-complementary-subject-paper-from-the-geces. 
139 https://www.macfound.org/programs/catalytic-capital-consortium/. The GIIN (2020) investor report stated that 78% of its sample had engaged 
with catalytic capital. Within this sample, the largest segment at 72% of respondents deployed some form of “flexible” debt, though only 49% 
described this as “subordinate”. 
140 https://thegiin.org/blended-finance-working-group; and http://www.oecd.org/publications/making-blended-finance-work-for-the-sustainable
development-goals-9789264288768-en.htm;https://www.blendedvalue.org/blog-posts/blended-value-investing-an-initial-paper-from-the
world-economic-forum; and https://www.weforum.org/reports/blended-finance-toolkit. 
141 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/193697/2900897_HMGCO_Co
mingling_acc.pdf. 
31 
terms as limited partners, but these could include foundations, investment funds, individual 
investments, and donations deployed via a charitable trust. Risk mitigation can take the form of a 
cornerstone investment from a foundation, as well as shared risk across the whole portfolio.142 
Moreover, in these funds, impact investors can also act as path finders for more commercial capital 
to identify an attractive investment opportunity through an impact lens.143 With risk-reward funds, 
foundations or other impact investors typically take a higher-risk position, but also receive an 
expected higher return. This should still leverage in extra commercial investment. Such structures 
may also include guarantees such as the African Agricultural Fund144 that was structured around 
a blend of high-risk equity from foundations (Gatsby, Rockefeller, and Gates), 
subordinate/unsecured debt from a commercial bank (JP Morgan), and a 50% loan guarantee from 
the United States Agency for International Development that changed the risk-return profile of the 
commercial debt. This allowed the fund to make equity and quasi-equity investments into 
smallholder farmers. Finally, with but-for funds, foundations, governments, or international 
development agencies typically invest on subordinate terms to leverage larger volumes of 
commercial investment to deliver impact at scale. For example, the Eye Fund145 loan fund blended 
three types of capital: equity and subordinate debt from foundations and individual impact 
investors with senior debt provided by commercial banks and DFIs. $1.48 million of equity and 
subordinated debt brought in $13 million in senior debt at nearly 13 times leverage. The fund 
provided direct loans to eye care organizations across the world.  
B. 
Impact Bonds 
As distinct from a green or social bond, an impact bond is a contingent future liability contract 
which is structured as a partnership aimed at improving social, developmental, or environmental 
outcomes for service users.146 The usual partners in an impact bond are investors who provide 
upfront working capital, service providers who use the invested capital to deliver (often novel) 
services, an outcomes payer who agrees to repay investors their capital with a return linked to 
agreed outcomes being achieved, and a third-party assessor of the service performance and 
142 Eg Esmee Fairnbairn Foundation in the Big Issue Invest Social Enterprise Investment Fund. 
143 As was the case with the Grameen Bank and BRAC pioneering microfinance, a market that is projected to be worth $174.4 billion by the year 
2025. https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2020/04/02/2010777/0/en/Global-Microfinance-Industry.html. 
144 https://www.aatif.lu/home.html. 
145 https://gsgii.org/case_studies/eye-fund/. 
146 https://golab.bsg.ox.ac.uk/the-basics/. 
32 
outcomes who audits the outcomes. In addition, another third-party partner may be required to 
structure the impact bond contract. 
Impact bonds are different from traditional contracts, such as fee-for-service or grant-based 
contracts as they are focused on the outcomes rather than the inputs and activities. For example, 
an impact bond that is seeking to support young people at school would be more interested in 
improvements in grades (outcomes) rather than the fact that the children were going to after-school 
classes or seeing a mentor (activities). Impact bonds encompass SIBs, development impact bonds 
(DIBs), and environmental impact bonds. 
In 2010, the Government of the UK pioneered the first SIB that is focused on reducing re-offending 
rates in HM Peterborough Prison.147 In 2015, the first DIB, focused on girls’ education in northern 
India, was launched.148 In 2018, the first environmental impact bond was launched.149 
By 2020, 200 impact bonds had been launched globally, raising more than $450 million in 
investment.150 
C. 
Impact Milestones 
Beyond fund and deal structures, impact investors have also innovated in terms of deploying 
capital around impact milestones, for example in loans that are linked to outcomes, such as the 
social impact incentives designed by Roots of Impact. At the deal level, this could include 
integrating impact milestones with other performance incentives, such as releasing capital in 
tranches, transferring the ownership of shares (vesting), or other options for equity buyback by the 
enterprise. If impact milestones are not achieved, disincentives can be built into to the deal structure, 
including investor exit or loan default. 
D. 
Outcomes Funds 
At the fund level, the Bertha Centre at the University of Cape Town co-created a Green Outcomes 
Fund that operates in a similar way as a social impact incentive, but at a fund level. Participating 
147 https://www.socialfinance.org.uk/peterborough-social-impact-bond. 
148 http://instiglio.org/educategirlsdib/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Educate-Girls-DIB-Sept-2015.pdf. 
149 https://www.goldmansachs.com/media-relations/press-releases/current/dc-water-environmental-impact-bond-fact-sheet.pdf. 
150 https://golab.bsg.ox.ac.uk/knowledge-bank/indigo-data-and-visualisation/impact-bond-dataset-v2/. 
33 
fund managers commit to investing their own capital into green enterprises to achieve 
predetermined social and environmental outcomes as well as a financial return. As they hit 
milestones, they can claim payment from the fund, which is capitalized by a mix of public and 
private grant capital. These outcome payments amount to a top-up payment because they are much 
smaller than the overall investments. Loans that are linked to outcomes allow outcome funders to 
leverage their capital to pay for a portion of the cost of impact. They are distinct from SIB and 
DIBs, where the full cost of outcomes are borne by the funder. Further, at the fund-manager level, 
impact performance can be linked to reward as a form of impact bonus as is already the case with 
some ESG funds.151 Similarly, a form of impact “carry” could link fund managers’ fees to impact 
performance.152 
E. 
Cooperative Finance 
Finally, in terms of the cooperative and mutual sector, the Fund for Employee Ownership has 
created an innovative fund that is focused on three strategies to change the ownership structure of 
companies: acquire, convert, and support strategy. The objective is to engage company owners 
with a transaction that resembles a standard buy out (acquire), but differs in terms of the change 
of ownership (convert). The investment model is patient capital.153 
IX.  ASIAN CONTEXT 
A. 
Green Bonds 
Investing in sustainable finance has been growing strongly in Asia since 2013, particularly in green 
bonds (Figure 13). Moreover, there is an opportunity for significant future green growth in Asia.154 
151 https://www.acre.com/thought-leadership/outcomes-aligned-incentive-structures-investment-management. 
152 Though this is, as yet a rare model. https://www.mdif.org/about/funds/. 
153 https://www.evgoh.com/tfeo/. 
154 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/224391/ewp-508.pdf. 
34 
Figure 13: Global Green Bonds Issued by Region ($ billion) 
Source: Climate Policy Initiative (2020). 
Until 2015, the sustainable finance market was dominated by Japan.155 However, the most 
significant growth in sustainable finance has been in the People’s Republic of China. By 2018, the 
PRC had issued 18% of all global green bonds (Figure 14). 
155 https://www.adb.org/publications/fostering-green-finance-sustainable-development-asia. 
35 
36 
 
 
 
Figure 14: Chinese Green Bonds Issued ($ billion) 2015–2018 
 
Source: UBS Global Wealth Management (https://www.ubs.com/global/en/wealth-management/chief
investment-office/market-insights/house-view/daily/2019/rise-of-si-in-asia.html).  
 
Further, by 2019, twelve Asian exchanges were requiring some form of ESG disclosure from their 
listed companies.156 
 
B. Social Bonds 
In 2019, social bonds accounted for only 5% of the total Asia and Pacific issuance of sustainable 
bonds. However, during 2020, issuance grew by 41%, partly as a market response to funding the 
challenges of COVID-19.157 For example, the Bank of China Macau issued a $638 million 
COVID-19 social bond—the first in the world to fund small and medium-sized enterprises that 
were affected by COVID-19. In the ROK, Kookmin Bank also issued a $500 million COVID-19 
social bond. In addition, Indonesia listed COVID-19 in its use of proceeds when it raised US$4.3 
billion of long-term debt funding. Asia’s social bond market is being shaped by national guidelines 
 
156 These are: Shanghai Stock Exchange; Shenzhen Stock Exchange; Hong Kong Exchange; National Stock Exchange of India; Indonesia Stock 
Exchange; Japan Exchange Group; Korea Exchange; Bursa Malaysia; Philippine Stock Exchange; Singapore Stock Exchange; Stock Exchange 
of Thailand; Hi Chi Min Stock Exchange (Vietnam): https://www.ubs.com/global/en/wealth-management/chief-investment-office/market
insights/house-view/daily/2019/rise-of-si-in-asia.html. 
157 https://www.gbm.hsbc.com/insights/growth/social-bonds-on-the-front-line. 
in the region as well as international standards. For example, since 2010, ADB has issued a series 
of themed bonds, focused on clean water, gender, and health, raising more than $2.7 billion. The 
Asia and Pacific region is now a global leader in social bond issuance. 
In 2018, in a related innovation, IIX Asia launched a Women’s Livelihood Bond158 as an $8 
million debt security designed to unlock capital for impact enterprises and microfinance 
institutions. The impact objective was to create new economic opportunities for women in 
Southeast Asia to help them transition from subsistence to sustainable livelihoods. In turn, the 
bond aimed to redefine the dominant socioeconomic narrative viewing in Asia that framed poor 
women as victims of poverty rather than drivers of development, change, and progress.159 By 2020, 
the bond had provided 385,000 women entrepreneurs with access to credit, new market access, 
and affordable goods and services. A second $12 million bond was issued in 2020.160 
C. 
Impact Investment 
In 2017, in terms of Southeast Asia, the impact investment market was relatively small at $904 
million of assets under management.161 The average deals size was also very small at $0.7 million 
and more than 50% of investments went into financial services. Indeed, the GIIN 2020 survey only 
included nine investor organizations across the whole continent or roughly 3% of the sample. 
While this may reflect some sample bias, it suggests that, in terms of impact investment that is 
narrowly defined, Asia remains a very underdeveloped market. Partly, this may be explained by 
the dominance of impact finance from DFIs at $11.2 billion into the region. 
Beyond Southeast Asia, although the PRC has been at the forefront of developing the green finance 
market in Asia, it has yet to engage seriously with impact investment. There has also been interest 
in developing an Asian “social” stock exchange.162 In terms of other impact investment 
infrastructure in Asia, the Asian Venture Philanthropy Network was established in 2011 to build 
the impact investment market and, by 2020, had 615 member organizations in 16 markets across 
158 https://iixglobal.com/portfolio-item/iix-womens-livelihood-bond/. 
159 https://iixglobal.com/portfolio-item/iix-womens-livelihood-bond/. 
160 https://iixglobal.com/iixs-womens-livelihood-bond-2-successfully-closes-part-of-asia-pacifics-first-ever-multi-country-listed-gender-bond
series/. 
161 https://thegiin.org/research/publication/landscape-southeast-asia. 
162 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/29306/impact-investors.pdf. 
37 
Asia.163 Further, by 2020, four countries in the region had established national advisory boards for 
impact investment as a part of the wider Global Steering Group for Impact Investment Project.164 
X.  CONCLUSION 
A. 
Opportunities 
There are several important opportunities to accelerate the growth of the sustainable finance 
market. These can be categorized as building the supply-side, intermediation, demand-side, or 
infrastructure of the market. Across these categories, four thematic clusters emerge. 
1. 
Post–COVID-19 Resilience 
In terms of opportunities for future sustainable investment, the post–COVID landscape will require 
significant investment into resilience and recovery programs that are focused on key social impact 
sectors, such as health, education, and meaningful employment.165 Addressing the continued 
shortfall in investment to achieve the SDGs also remains a key opportunity. 
At the same time, the climate crisis will demand substantial new investment in adaptation (such as 
better flood and fire defences), mitigation (to reduce carbon intensity and pollution), and 
development (to devise new technologies of carbon capture).166 These issues will be particularly 
pressing in countries already prone to flooding, such as Bangladesh, the Philippines, Thailand, and 
Viet Nam.167 
In these contexts, the issuance of sovereign sustainable bonds offers a potential new source of 
impact capital at scale to address social168 and environmental169 issues. 
2. 
New Sources of Sustainable Finance 
There are six important opportunities to access new capital to grow the sustainable finance market 
substantially. 
163 https://avpn.asia/about-us/. 
164 https://gsgii.org/nab-countries/. The countries are Japan, Bangladesh, India, and the Republic of Korea. 
165 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EuKd6i-XBV0. 
166 https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-02712-3. 
167 https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2018/09/southeast-asia-climate-change-and-greenhouse-gas-emissions-prakash.htm. 
168 https://www.ipe.com/sovereign-bonds-sustainable-sovereigns-will-pay-their-way/42332.article. 
169 https://www.ft.com/content/c02a8184-5c9d-45ce-b4bd-02b028de7f63. 
38 
First, in the case of foundation assets, there is a huge opportunity to leverage more capital for 
impact. Foundation assets are typically not invested for impact. For example, historically, the 
Rockefeller Foundation has invested only about $68 million (or 1.8% of its total endowment) in 
MRIs that are focused on renewables, clean energy and technology, and sustainable forestry. 
Moreover, only $85 million (or 2.2%) of the endowment is invested in negative/exclusionary 
ESG.170 This leaves roughly 96% of assets invested in the mainstream (non-impact) markets. In a 
response to this in-balance between the impact focus of foundation assets and grant making, in 
2017, the Ford Foundation made a strategic decision to commit $1 billion of its endowment to 
MRIs.171 However, this was still only 8% of its total endowment of $12.4 billion. Total foundation 
assets are estimated to be $1.5 trillion. Assuming the same MRI investment as the Rockefeller 
Foundation, this would mean that 96% of these assets, or an additional $1.44 billion, could be 
made available for impact finance as MRIs. 
Second, in terms of negative/exclusionary ESG finance, there is an opportunity to move this 
towards the Double Delta positive/integrated model to increase its impact. For example, if 50% of 
this investment were directed towards providing additional capital to fund the SDGs, then the 
current shortfall would disappear.172  
Third, since 2016, there has been a 180% growth in the number of millionaires in Asia to 8.1 
million in 2019.173 These high-net worth investors offer an opportunity for significant new 
sustainable investment should they follow the trends in millennial investing.174 
Fourth, there is also a promising role for faith-based finance to contribute more towards sustainable 
impact,175 particularly Islamic finance.176  
170 https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/Rockefeller-Foundation-Social-Investing-Guidelines.pdf.pdf. 
171 https://www.fordfoundation.org/the-latest/news/ford-foundation-commits-1-billion-from-endowment-to-mission-related-investments/. 
172 https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2019-green-finance/. 
173 https://www.theasianbanker.com/updates-and-articles/china-shifts-distribution-of-wealth-upwards-across-asia-pacific. 
174 https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/blog/social-impact-investing-china-tipping-point/. There is also some evidence that an ESG investing 
model developed by CASVI outperformed the PRC's benchmark index by over 4 percentage points annually over a 5-year period to 2019. 
https://www.pionline.com/esg/why-china-missing-out-trillions-sustainable-investment. 
175 http://faithinvest.org. 
176 http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/591721554824346344/pdf/Islamic-Green-Finance-Development-Ecosystem-and-Prospects.pdf. 
39 
Fifth, development finance institutions and foundations could do more to deploy their grants and 
guarantees strategically to grow the market.177 They could operate as outcomes payers in 
environmental and social impact bonds. 
Finally, retail investors could use their influence as account holders and pension fund investors to 
influence mainstream institutions to invest their assets more sustainably. 
3. 
Regulation 
Following the example of Big Society Capital in the UK, as well as the ROK and Japan in Asia, 
regulation could be put in place to release dormant bank accounts to finance sustainable finance 
wholesalers. Similarly, government actors could use regulation to enforce disclosure of 
nonfinancial and impact data to improve the transparency and efficiency of the market for 
sustainable finance.178 
4. 
Research 
Finally, new flows of sustainable finance could support the development of consolidated impact 
data sets to improve the efficiency of capital allocation in the sustainable finance market, as well 
as sponsor the establishment of regional impact stock markets leveraging existing networks, such 
as Asian Venture Philanthropy Network and IIX. Table 3 sets out these opportunities in terms of 
building the sustainable finance market’s supply-side, intermediation, demand-side, and other 
opportunities such as research. 
Table 3 Opportunities to Grow Sustainable Investment by Investor 
Investors 
Supply-Side 
Intermediation 
Foundation assets 
Demand-Side 
Deploy all endowment assets 
as MRI 
Other 
Negative/exclusionary 
finance 
Deploy assets as 
positive/integrated ESG 
finance 
Foundations and high 
net worth individuals 
Deploy grants to support 
early-stage enterprises and 
build infrastructure 
Build new 
instruments 
Deploy grants to 
build investment 
readiness, 
capacity to 
manage 
177 https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/a8398ed6-55d0-4cc4-95aa
Build 
networks of 
knowledge 
and link 
investors 
bcbabe39f79f/DFI+Blended+Concessional+Finance+for+Private+Sector+Operations_Summary+R....pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=lYCLe0B. 
178 https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/company-reporting-and-auditing/company-reporting/non-financial-reporting_en. 
40 
41 
 
Deploy concessionary capital 
to leverage in mainstream 
investment 
 
Act as outcomes payer in 
impact bonds 
investment, and 
early stage 
‘proof or 
concept’ 
Faith-based finance Deploy assets as 
positive/integrated ESG 
finance 
   
Impact investors Deploy concessionary capital 
to leverage in mainstream 
investment  
 
Act as outcomes payer in 
impact bonds 
Build funds and 
wholesale 
infrastructure 
 Build 
networks of 
knowledge 
and link 
investors 
Development finance 
institutions 
Deploy concessionary capital 
to leverage in mainstream 
investment 
 
Act as outcomes payer in 
impact bonds 
Build funds and 
wholesale 
infrastructure 
Deploy grants to 
build investment 
readiness, 
capacity to 
manage 
investment, and 
early stage 
‘proof or 
concept’ 
Build 
networks of 
knowledge 
and link 
investors 
Governments Deploy grants to support 
early-stage enterprises and 
build infrastructure 
 
 
Act as outcomes payer in 
impact bonds 
Regulate impact 
standards and 
disclosure best 
practice 
Deploy 
sovereign wealth 
to social and 
green bonds 
 
Use fiscal policy 
to build demand 
Offer grants 
to build 
research in 
universities 
and 
elsewhere 
Transnational bodies Deploy grants to support 
early-stage enterprises and 
build infrastructure 
Build impact 
standards and 
disclosure best 
practice 
Advocate for 
sovereign wealth 
to invest in 
social and green 
bonds 
Build 
research and 
robust 
evidence of 
sustainable 
investment 
models and 
impact 
Retail investors Lobby pension funds to divest 
from carbon intensive stock 
and invest in sustainable 
stocks 
 Support 
cooperative and 
mutual firms 
Buy ethical 
products 
Use the 
media 
and/or social 
media to 
advocate for 
sustainable 
finance 
ESG = environmental, social, and governance; MRI = mission-related investment. 
Source: Author’s own research. 
C. 
Challenges 
1. 
Market Efficiency 
In terms of challenges, on the supply-side, a lack of investable deals in some sectors remains and 
building a pipeline of investees continues to be a challenge. While there are likely to be 
opportunities in green finance, the demand-side landscape of deals across the SDGs is less well 
defined. Several interventions are necessary, and grants and angel finance are needed to be 
included to support early-stage enterprises and grants to build investment readiness and the 
capacity to manage investment and growth. 
In terms of the infrastructure of the market, there are currently high transaction costs in putting 
together many deals and funds because of the lack of a robust impact performance evidence base 
and data, as well as the complexity of blended transactions. All markets function best on abundant 
and robust performance data. However, sustainable investing lacks a “Bloomberg” for impact. As 
things currently stand, many sustainable investing fund managers, to some extent, are building 
their own performance data sets as they go along, learning from testing supply-side investor 
preferences and often building the demand-side in collaboration with others to find good deals179 
and build pipelines.180 
2. 
Standards and Data  
Related to the issue of the lack of financial performance data, the sustainable investing market also 
lacks agreed standards or regulatory structures for impact measurement or disclosure. However, 
various initiatives are actively addressing this issue and taking a leading role in driving a consensus 
on standards, particularly in a process of consolidation with related standards, such as the GRI, 
PRI, and SASB. In 2019, in collaboration with the Impact Management Project,181 the UNDP has 
developed a set of standards for investing under the SDG Impact initiative. The first of these has 
179 For guidance: https://thegiin.org/managing-an-impact-investing-fund/. 
180 https://sancroft.com/2019/01/30/impact-investing-a-decade-on-what-is-missing-to-scale-it-up/. 
181 https://impactmanagementproject.com. 
42 
focused on private equity, with SDG bonds and enterprise standards to follow.182 As data sets 
emerge from these standards, the transactions costs should drop. 
3. 
Monetization 
A separate strand of innovation on impact reporting standards has focused on how to monetize 
impact. Developing such methodologies offers the obvious attraction that it would allow not only 
for a comparative analysis of impact deals and funds with a common financial unit analysis but 
would also allow a composite impact “enterprise” value to be calculated by combining expected 
or historical financial and monetized impact performance together. The Social Return on 
Investment methodology pioneered such an approach that, more recently, has been taken forward 
by various initiatives such as the Impact Multiple of Money.183  
4. 
Green-Washing 
Perhaps surprisingly, in 2021, the top five ESG ranked firms were large corporations without a 
core impact focus.184 These are: 
182 https://sdgimpact.undp.org/practice-standards.html. 
183 https://therisefund.com/measurement. 
184 https://www.alpha-sense.com/insights/top-rated-esg-stocks. 
43 
1. NextEra Energy - the largest electric utility by market cap in the US that has been 
consistently reducing its emissions through increased renewable energy use. Its CO2 
emissions are 55% less than those of an average US utility. It has now set a goal of 
reducing CO2 emissions by 67% by 2025 from its 2005 base levels meaning that absolute 
CO2 emissions will reduce by 40% even while the firm’s energy production will double 
during that time.  
2. NVIDIA – a graphic cards manufacturer supplying chips to cryptocurrency miners. It has 
a stringent policy regarding not using conflict minerals in its products. The company also 
trains its workforce in anti-corruption and anti-bribery strategies. 
3. Chr. Hansen – a Danish bioscience company that operates in the human nutrition space. It 
specializes in producing bacteria that reduce pesticide usage, increase crop yield, and 
curb food wastage, improving food security and reducing food waste.  
4. Microsoft – committed towards carbon mitigation by becoming the first large technology 
company to target carbon negative status by 2030. It has created a $1 billion fund to 
reduce emissions and increase carbon capture.  
5. Home Depot - the largest home improvement retailer in the US. It has a strict sourcing 
policy that prevents the purchase of conflict minerals and avoids exploiting the natural 
resources of developing countries. It plans to reduce its carbon emissions by 40% by 2030 
and 50% by 2035.  
Despite the substantial growth of green finance over recent years, material concerns remain around 
transparency, disclosure, and the potential for “greenwashing”.185 For example, the World 
Economic Forum reported that, while 63% of the companies in its ESG index had a policy in place 
to reduce their emissions, only 35% had specific reduction targets.186 Further, according to the 
Bank for International Settlements, in a survey of >200 firms in 2015–2018, ESG investing was 
biased towards firms that tended to be cleaner in the first place.187 More than 70% of issuers had 
a carbon intensity equivalent to, or lower than, a multinational consumer products firm, such as 
Procter and Gamble. In contrast, carbon-intensive or highly polluting companies rarely issued 
green bonds for fear of being accused of greenwashing. Moreover, many green bonds are simply 
185 https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2019/12/07/climate-change-has-made-esg-a-force-in-investing. 
186 https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/01/sustainable-finance-starts-with-data/. 
187 https://www.bis.org/publ/othp31.pdf. 
44 
used to refinance already green projects without an additional reduction in carbon dioxide 
emissions). Also, such critiques have been raised against the wider sustainable finance sector.188 
The entry of the mainstream investment banks into the impact investing market, inevitably, will 
make it grow substantially over time, though some concerns remain over the potential for “impact- 
or green-washing”.189 
D. 
Summary 
The market for sustainable finance is growing globally. In Asia, and particularly in the PRC, the 
sustainable finance market is accelerating too, largely driven by green bonds. The market includes 
a range of types of capital under the broad ESG heading. The spectrum of these types of capital 
ranges from grants to market or above market rate return investments. Sustainable finance can be 
deployed as negative/exclusionary investments that aim to “do no harm” or positive/integrated 
investments that can be deployed to create additional social or environmental impact typically 
aligned with the SDGs. 
The availability of a variety of types of capital across the spectrum of sustainable finance has 
driven innovation in terms of new investment instruments—such as quasi-equity—and new deal 
or fund-level investment structures categorized by blended or catalytic capital structures. 
However, the market for sustainable investment remains at an early stage of development. Most 
importantly, the regulatory and disclosure infrastructure remains incomplete and inconsistent 
across countries. As a result, robust and comparable impact performance data, which is necessary 
for the effective allocation of sustainable finance, is absent. The consequences are not only 
inefficient capital allocation in terms of optimizing both financial and social/environmental 
performance, but also the opportunity for impact- or green-washing. The lack of robust data also 
adds to capital allocation transaction costs. 
In this context, local, national, regional, and transnational governance bodies have an opportunity 
to use policy to correct the market failures in the current sustainable finance market.  
188For example, critiques of ESG ratings systems. https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2019/12/07/climate
change-has-made-esg-a-force-in-investing 
as
 well
 as
 warnings
 over 
“greenwashing” 
funds. 
https://www.ftadviser.com/investments/2020/07/16/be-critical-of-esg-credentials-to-avoid-greenwashing-funds/. 
189 https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-09/-social-washing-is-becoming-growing-headache-for-esg-investors. 
45 
The need for further dramatic growth in the supply of sustainable finance, already evidenced by 
the shortfall in SDG funding, has been further amplified in the post-COVID19 world and the 
acceleration of the climate crisis. To achieve this, investors, investees, intermediaries, and policy 
makers will need to find ways to work effectively together with an increased sense of urgency. 
